ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 05 November 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02134
Edited by:
Juha Silvanto,
University of Westminster,
United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Ned Block,
New York University, United States
David Rosenthal,
The City University of New York,
United States
*Correspondence:
Matthias Michel
matthias.michel.curtil@gmail.com
Alan L. F. Lee
alanlee@ln.edu.hk
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Consciousness Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 12 September 2018
Accepted: 16 October 2018
Published: 05 November 2018
Citation:
Michel M, Fleming SM, Lau H,
Lee ALF, Martinez-Conde S,
Passingham RE, Peters MAK,
Rahnev D, Sergent C and Liu K
(2018) An Informal Internet Survey on
the Current State of Consciousness
Science. Front. Psychol. 9:2134.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02134
An Informal Internet Survey on the
Current State of Consciousness
Science
Matthias Michel1*, Stephen M. Fleming2, Hakwan Lau3,4,5, Alan L. F. Lee6*,
Susana Martinez-Conde7, Richard E. Passingham8, Megan A. K. Peters9,
Dobromir Rahnev10, Claire Sergent11 and Kayuet Liu12
1 Department of Philosophy, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France, 2 Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University
College London, London, United Kingdom, 3 Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA, United States, 4 Brain Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States,
5 Department of Psychology, Hong State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, 6 Department of Applied Psychology, Lingnan University, Tuen Mun, Hong Kong, 7 SUNY Downstate
Medical Center, State University of New York, New York, NY, United States, 8 Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9 Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Riverside, Riverside,
CA, United States, 10 School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, United States, 11 Laboratoire
Psychologie de la Perception, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS, Paris, France, 12 Department of Sociology, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States
The scientiﬁc study of consciousness emerged as an organized ﬁeld of research only
a few decades ago. As empirical results have begun to enhance our understanding
of consciousness, it is important to ﬁnd out whether other factors, such as funding
for consciousness research and status of consciousness scientists, provide a suitable
environment for the ﬁeld to grow and develop sustainably. We conducted an
online survey on people’s views regarding various aspects of the scientiﬁc study of
consciousness as a ﬁeld of research. 249 participants completed the survey, among
which 80% were in academia, and around 40% were experts in consciousness
research. Topics covered include the progress made by the ﬁeld, funding for
consciousness research, job opportunities for consciousness researchers, and the
scientiﬁc rigor of the work done by researchers in the ﬁeld. The majority of respondents
(78%) indicated that scientiﬁc research on consciousness has been making progress.
However, most participants perceived obtaining funding and getting a job in the ﬁeld of
consciousness research as more difﬁcult than in other subﬁelds of neuroscience. Overall,
work done in consciousness research was perceived to be less rigorous than other
neuroscience subﬁelds, but this perceived lack of rigor was not related to the perceived
difﬁculty in ﬁnding jobs and obtaining funding. Lastly, we found that, overall, the global
workspace theory was perceived to be the most promising (around 28%), while most
non-expert researchers (around 22% of non-experts) found the integrated information
theory (IIT) most promising. We believe the survey results provide an interesting picture
of current opinions from scientists and researchers about the progresses made and the
challenges faced by consciousness research as an independent ﬁeld. They will inspire
collective reﬂection on the future directions regarding funding and job opportunities for
the ﬁeld.
Keywords: consciousness, consciousness science, survey, meta-science, consciousness research
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2134

Michel et al.
Online Survey on Consciousness Science
INTRODUCTION
At the beginning of the 20th century, behaviorists wanted to
constitute psychology as a scientiﬁc discipline by getting rid
of mentalistic notions such as attention, memory, volition,
mental imagery, and consciousness, which they regarded as
unscientiﬁc (Watson, 1913; Skinner, 1953). This proved to be
a mistake. With the rise of cognitive science, a wide variety
of mental phenomena were progressively reintroduced within
the scope of scientiﬁc investigation. However, while perceptual
mechanisms were extensively studied, little eﬀort was made to
understand which mechanisms bring about consciousness of the
contents of perception. The scientiﬁc study of consciousness
became an organized ﬁeld of research less than 30 years ago.
Since then, a large number of empirical ﬁndings increased our
understanding of consciousness (Block et al., 2014). Scientiﬁc
progress, however, does not only consist of the advancement of
knowledge (Kitcher, 1995). Increased funding for consciousness
research and the rising status of scientists engaging in the ﬁeld
are also fundamental indicators of scientiﬁc progress as well as
sine qua non conditions for such progress, and should not be
overlooked. Here, we present the results of a survey designed to
investigate the current state of the neuroscience of consciousness
in regards to these latter aspects.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Two hundred and fourty-nine subjects replied to our informal
online survey. Participants were notiﬁed that they would not
be compensated for their participation in the survey, and
could stop taking the survey at any time. They were also
informed that the purpose of the survey was to investigate
their
attitudes
about
current
research
on
consciousness.
Survey procedures were approved by the UCLA Institutional
Review Board. Subjects completed the survey through the
online software SurveyMonkey, by using their phone or
computer. The survey was advertised through social media
(e.g., Facebook, Twitter). As such, the survey did not involve
random sampling or counterbalancing of question order,
and it is also diﬃcult to assess response rate; we will address
these limitations further in Section “Discussion.” The survey
was conducted between January 29, 2018 and February 14,
2018.
We asked 23 questions to the participants. We collected
demographic data on the following: age, region, gender, year of
highest degree, current position, number of publications, number
of publications related to consciousness, number of publications
on consciousness in public media, primary domain of expertise,
conferences on consciousness attended (ASSC or Tucson), total
amount of grants received for studying consciousness, overall
amount of grants received.
Other questions concerned the possibility of a complete
biological
explanation
of
consciousness,
progress
in
the
understanding
of
consciousness
thanks
to
neuroscience
and psychology, improvement in the ﬁeld of consciousness
science, theories of consciousness perceived as most promising,
experimental rigor of the work on consciousness compared
to other subﬁelds in neuroscience, diﬃculty of successfully
competing for funding while studying consciousness compared
to other neuroscience subﬁelds, diﬃculty of the job market
in consciousness science compared to other neuroscience
subﬁelds, preference for public or private funding of the
work on consciousness, accuracy of popular media articles on
consciousness, and perceived beneﬁts of popular media article
on consciousness.
For a full list of details of questions asked, please see
Supplementary Data.
RESULTS
Of the 249 respondents, as many as 59% were active scholars
(with >5 publications), and 29% were either tenure track or
tenured academics. Overall, 80% of our participants were in
academia. We achieved a good balance between experts in the
ﬁeld (43%, deﬁned both as having attended ASSC—a conference
organized by a professional society—or having published >5
papers on the topic), versus non-experts. 30% of participants were
neuroscientists, 4% computer scientists, 20% philosophers, 37%
psychologists, and 9% were working in other areas (humanities
or natural/engineer sciences). 31% of the participants were
primarily based in North America and 54% were based in
Europe. On average, participants were 37 years old. 30% of
participants were female, and 65% male (with 1% “Other”
and 4% “Refuse to disclose”). See Supplementary Data for
details.
Progress
A great majority of participants (78%) agreed that progress has
been made in the scientiﬁc study of consciousness. This result
appears to hold regardless of whether one studies consciousness
or not, as we found no dependence between expertise and
perceived progress in the ﬁeld [chi-squared tests, p = 0.32].
Funding
Many participants (36%) judged it more diﬃcult to obtain
funding for consciousness research than for other subﬁelds
of neuroscience they were familiar with (Figure 1). This was
especially true for participants based primarily in North America,
compared to those based primarily in Europe [Wilcoxon rank-
sum test: p = 0.02]. We found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
experts and non-experts on the perceived diﬃculty of obtaining
funding for studying consciousness [chi-squared test; p = 0.67].
Jobs
About half of participants reported that they believe it is
more diﬃcult to ﬁnd a job in academia as a consciousness
researcher than in other neuroscience subﬁelds. Neuroscientists
were more likely than those in other ﬁelds to respond
that ﬁnding a job in consciousness science is more diﬃcult
compared to other subﬁelds in neuroscience (Figure 2). We
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2134

Michel et al.
Online Survey on Consciousness Science
FIGURE 1 | Responses to the question “Compared to some other subﬁelds in neuroscience, how difﬁcult is it to successfully compete for funding for doing empirical
work on consciousness?” by primary region in which the respondents are based.
FIGURE 2 | Responses to the question “Compared to some other subﬁelds in neuroscience, how difﬁcult do you think it is for students and postdocs working
primarily on consciousness to compete for faculty/independent principal investigator positions?” by area of expertise of the respondent.
found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between experts and non-
experts on perceived job-market diﬃculty [chi-squared test;
p = 0.38].
Rigor
More participants considered the work done in the ﬁeld less
rigorous than in other ﬁelds (34%), rather than the other way
round (8%). This was true regardless of whether respondents
worked on consciousness or not [chi-squared test; p = 0.65],
which indicates that this is not just an outgroup bias; even experts
within the ﬁeld perceive lack of rigor as a problem.
This perceived lack of rigor does not explain the lack of
funding and jobs, however. The ﬁeld of consciousness was
seen as similarly or more rigorous than ﬁelds such as social
neuroscience (33% reported consciousness science as “more
rigorous” than social neuroscience, versus only 10% who reported
it as “less rigorous”), again both by experts as well as non-experts.
Nonetheless, respondents reported that funding and jobs are
found with greater diﬃculty for consciousness science than for
social neuroscience (31% considered it more diﬃcult to obtain
funding for studying consciousness than social neuroscience,
versus 6% who found it less diﬃcult; 41% perceived the job
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2134

Michel et al.
Online Survey on Consciousness Science
market as more diﬃcult for those who study consciousness
compared to social neuroscience, versus 3% who found it less
diﬃcult).
Role of Private Funding and Media
A large proportion of participants agreed that, for the healthy
development of the ﬁeld, public funding should be preferred
over private funding (47 vs. 6%). This may be related to the
concern that private funders might be misinformed by the
depiction of the neuroscience of consciousness in popular media.
Indeed, 44% of participants considered the representation of
the neuroscience of consciousness in popular media to be
less accurate than the representation of other scientiﬁc topics,
whereas only 5% found it more accurate. The below section
contains a possibly relevant and interesting example of media
inﬂuence.
Theories Perceived as Most Promising
We asked participants to rate which consciousness theory
they perceived to be most promising. Overall, the global
workspace theory (Dehaene and Changeux, 2011; Dehaene
et al., 2014) was seen as the most promising theory of
consciousness
(28%).
On
the
other
hand,
among
non-
experts only, IIT [Integrated Information Theory; (Oizumi
et al., 2014; Tononi et al., 2016)] was considered to be
the most promising theory (22% of non-experts); this was
true whether expertise was deﬁned as having published
more than ﬁve articles on consciousness (chi-squared test,
p < 0.05), or attending ASSC at least once (chi-squared test,
p < 0.05).
We suspect that one explanation for this may be that IIT
has been promoted heavily in popular media, with such claims
as “[IIT is the] only really promising fundamental theory of
consciousness,” appearing in inﬂuential media outlets1. Non-
experts may be particularly inﬂuenced by these claims. We
also cannot rule out other possibilities, however, such that
non-experts may be particularly impressed by mathematical
complexity (a feature of IIT relative to other theories presented
in our survey).
For further details about the responses to each of the questions
asked, please see Supplementary Data.
DISCUSSION
The ﬁeld of consciousness research is perceived as making
progress. However, the ﬁeld also faces signiﬁcant challenges that
could overthrow the progress accomplished so far.
We emphasize that this survey was informal and that our
results are subject to signiﬁcant limitations. For example, the
sample size of 249 participants may be considered small.
However, we note that the typical attendance to ASSC is under
500 people. Hence, relative to the size of the ﬁeld, including over
a 100 experts plus a group of non-experts of similar size is not
uninformative.
Moreover, since the survey was advertised through social
media, the opinions of our participants might reﬂect some degree
of selection bias. It is possible that respondents selected through
social media could be more sympathetic to the overall project
of a neuroscience of consciousness than the overall scientiﬁc
1See,
e.g.,
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/21/science/21consciousness.html,
https://qz.com/709969/2300-years-later-platos-theory-of-consciousness-is-being-
backed-up-by-neuroscience/,
https://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/how-
much-consciousness-does-an-iphone-have, or https://www.huﬃngtonpost.com/
bobby-azarian/post_10079_b_8160914.html.
FIGURE 3 | Comparison between answers from experts and non-experts to the question: “To the extent that you have read/heard about them, which of the following
theories seem most promising to you?” GW, Global Workspace Theory; HOT, Higher-Order Theory; IIT, Integrated Information Theory; LR, Local Recurrence Theory.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2134

Michel et al.
Online Survey on Consciousness Science
population. However, as can be seen in the data, e.g., Figure 3,
a fairly broad group of experts were included in the survey
(n = 106), in addition to a good number of non-experts (n = 143).
The comparisons made in the report highlight that many of the
perceived notions about the ﬁeld are common to both groups.
It could be argued that in our sampling, participants may
be biased in favor of consciousness science, because those who
answered the survey were probably interested in consciousness
science in the ﬁrst place. But it is important to note that
most participants considered that the science of consciousness
was less rigorous than work done in other disciplines. While
this does not mean that respondents were uninterested in
consciousness, it does suggests that they were not unconditional
promoters of consciousness research. Importantly, many of the
interesting results concern comparisons between experts and
non-experts within the cohort. Biases that apply to the entire
cohort should aﬀect overall patterns, but not the comparisons
between subgroups (where biases should be largely subtracted
out). Finally, as we noted above, the sample size is not small
relative to the size of the ﬁeld.
One could also argue that our deﬁnitions of the categories of
“experts” and “non-experts” do not correctly represent expertise
on consciousness science. However, non-experts did appear to
have a lower degree of knowledge of the ﬁeld than experts, as
they selected “don’t know” answers more often on all questions
(as reﬂected, for example, in Figure 3). Moreover, our results
did not signiﬁcantly vary depending on how we deﬁned expertise
(either as publishing more than ﬁve articles on consciousness, or
as attending to the ASSC at least once).
Finally, when questioning preferred theories, we did not
represent illusionism, quantum theories of consciousness, or the
view that no satisfying theory of consciousness can be developed.
As such, these theories were only represented indirectly, as
belonging to the category “other.” This might have biased results
in favor of the various theories explicitly represented. Although
we note that this could be a problem, it is unlikely that any
of the four theories that we presented should have particularly
beneﬁted from this limitation. Hence, the overall distribution
of preferences between theories would probably have been
preserved even if all theories of consciousness were represented.
Moreover, even if the absence of some theories such as
illusionism or quantum theories of consciousness might have
biased the choice in favor of represented theories, this bias
probably did not aﬀect the overall pattern of responses as a
function of expertise.
Overall, despite these caveats, this survey provides an
interesting picture of the current opinion of a group of scientists
on the progresses and challenges in the ﬁeld of consciousness, and
we hope that it might spark a collective reﬂection on the future of
funding policies in the domain.
ETHICS STATEMENT
This
study
was
carried
out
in
accordance
with
the
recommendations from of the UCLA Oﬃce of the Human
Research Protection Program. The protocol was approved by
the UCLA Institutional Review Board.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MM and HL contributed to the conception and design of the
study. MM organized the database, performed the statistical
analysis, and wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript. All authors
contributed to manuscript revision, read, and approved the
submitted version.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.
2018.02134/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Block, N., Carmel, D., Fleming, S. M., Kentridge, R. W., Koch, C., Lamme,
V. A., et al. (2014). Consciousness science: real progress and lingering
misconceptions. Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 556–557. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2014.
09.004
Dehaene, S., and Changeux, J. P. (2011). Experimental and theoretical approaches
to conscious processing. Neuron 70, 200–227. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.
03.018
Dehaene, S., Charles, L., King, J.-R., and Marti, S. (2014). Toward a computational
theory of conscious processing. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 25, 76–84. doi: 10.1016/
j.conb.2013.12.005
Kitcher, P. (1995). The Advancement of Science: Science Without Legend, Objectivity
Without Illusions. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi: 10.1093/0195096533.
001.0001
Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., and Tononi, G. (2014). From the phenomenology to the
mechanisms of consciousness: integrated information theory 3.0. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 10:e1003588. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003588
Skinner,
B.
F.
(1953).
Science
and
Human
Behavior.
New
York,
NY: Macmillan.
Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., and Koch, C. (2016). Integrated information
theory: from consciousness to its physical substrate. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17,
450–461. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.44
Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychol. Rev. 20,
158–177. doi: 10.1037/h0074428
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
The reviewer DR declared a past co-authorship with one of the authors HL to the
handling Editor.
Copyright © 2018 Michel, Fleming, Lau, Lee, Martinez-Conde, Passingham, Peters,
Rahnev, Sergent and Liu. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
November 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 2134
