1 
Title 
 
Delay Coordinate Embedding as Neuronally Implemented Information Processing: The State 
Space Theory of Consciousness 
 
Authors 
 
Vikas N. O'Reilly-Shah, MD, PhD*# 
* Department of Anesthesiology & Pain Medicine 
University of Washington School of Medicine  
 
# Corresponding Author 
Professor of Anesthesiology & Pain Medicine 
University of Washington School of Medicine 
RR450, 1959 NE Pacific St, Seattle, WA 98195 
 
 
Disclosure of funding:  This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the 
public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.  
  
Conflicts of interest:  All authors declare: no support from any organization for the submitted 
work; no financial relationships with any organizations that might have an interest in the 
submitted work in the previous three years; no other relationships or activities that could appear 
to have influenced the submitted work.  
 
AI Use Statement: ChatGPT, Claude, and other large language models may have been used to 
generate draft language for this manuscript. Every word has been reviewed and every sentence 
has been edited for clarity and accuracy. Citations were manually retrieved from traditional 
sources (e.g., PubMed). The authors take full responsibility for all content within this 
manuscript. 
  
Author contributions: All authors meet ICMJE criteria for authorship. V-OS conceived the work 
and drafted the paper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
Abstract:   
 
Despite intensive effort, a satisfactory scientific theory of consciousness remains elusive. This 
paper introduces the State Space Theory, aiming to meet key criteria for a theory of 
consciousness while providing a satisfactory framework consistent with neurobiological and 
philosophical considerations. The theory posits that the cortex processes information through 
delay coordinate embedding within recurrent neural networks. These networks create state space 
representations of reality, forming hierarchical, pseudo-hierarchical, and parallel pathways. 
Under this theory, consciousness is posited to arise at the highest-order engines in this hierarchy, 
with complex behavioral options competing within these engines. The theory emphasizes that 
consciousness is a dynamic process, not representable within a static neuronal state, and 
develops uniquely in each individual due to history-dependent development of the processing 
engines. 
 
Neuronally, these delay coordinate embedding engines are posited to form recurrent networks 
that process information by integrating current and past data to reconstruct models of reality, 
leveraging the power of Takens' Theorem. These engines would themselves exhibit nonlinear 
dynamics sensitive to initial conditions. This mechanism aligns with the subjective and emergent 
properties of consciousness, explaining phenomena like binocular rivalry and ambiguous figures. 
The theory also addresses cortical plasticity and the heuristic nature of cortical processing, 
aligning with neurobiological evidence supporting the idea that the cortex's information 
processing is generic rather than specialized. 
 
The State Space Theory aligns with and expands upon major theories like Higher-Order 
Theories, Global Workspace Theories, Integrated Information Theory, and Predictive Processing 
Theories by providing a computational mechanism for hierarchical integration and recurrent 
processing. Philosophically, it reconciles dualist intuitions with a monist perspective, positing 
that consciousness emerges from dynamic brain processes rather than static states. The theory 
addresses the unity of consciousness and the privacy of subjective experiences, offering a new 
framework to understand free will within deterministic systems. Future work will refine this 
theory, exploring its neural mechanisms and validating its predictions, advancing our 
understanding of consciousness. 
 
Key Words: Theory of Consciousness, Delay Coordinate Embedding, Recurrent Neural 
Networks, Hierarchical Integration, Nonlinear Dynamics 
 
 
 

3 
Introduction 
Despite a substantial effort, which has dramatically increased over the past several 
decades, a satisfactory scientific theory of consciousness remains elusive. Spectacular advances 
in our ability to study the behavior of neuronal systems in situ and at scale have not yet yielded 
the theoretical bridge that connects the behavior of these systems with an explanation of 
phenomenal consciousness; as yet, the hard problem of consciousness has not been solved even 
as proffered physicalist theories of consciousness continue to multiply.(Seth & Bayne 2022) 
The problems that continue to plague theories of consciousness have been well described; 
a recent paper by Doerig and colleagues offers a reasonable starting point for assessing the 
viability of these and proposed theories.(Doerig et al. 2021) In it, the authors identify that 
theories must be constructed in such a way as to cope with a number of key questions and 
criteria. These elements represent a summary of the major neuroscientific, analytical, and 
philosophical considerations and quandaries affecting the viability of various candidate theories 
of consciousness. 
 
Presentation of the Theory 
This paper aims to develop a theory of consciousness that aims to fulfill these and other 
key criteria. The main ideas put forth in this paper - the State Space Theory - are as follows: 
1. Generic computation - The computational processing that occurs in the cortex is 
somewhat generic rather than highly specialized. This is evidenced through 
neuroscientific observations including interindividual variability in normal brain function 
(primary visual cortex; Broca's area) as well as plasticity in response to congenital 

4 
disorders, trauma, or surgery (visual cortex activation in Braille reading; 
hemispherectomy). 
2. Delay coordinate embedding - The specific approach taken by the cortex to process 
information occurs through a process called delay coordinate embedding. Short- and 
long-range recurrent cortical networks form the neurobiological basis for delay 
coordinate embedded processing in the cortex. Neuronally implemented delay coordinate 
embedding engines are responsible for the information processing that results in the 
instantiation of representations of reality within neuronal systems. 
3. Recurrent networks are not unfoldable - Under the hypothesis, delay coordinate 
embedding engines are modified in the process of firing, allowing engines to both learn 
and represent different aspects of the state space being represented. In addition, delay 
coordinate embedding is a process rather than an algorithm. As a result, these recurrent 
processing engines would not fulfill criteria necessary to unfold a recurrent network into 
a feedforward network. 
4. State space representations - Delay coordinate embedding creates representations of 
reality by encoding aspects of reality positioned within a state space describing that 
aspect of reality. 
5. Hierarchical organization - Delay coordinate embedding engines are arranged pseudo-
hierarchically, with higher order delay coordinate embedding engines representing 
increasingly abstract and synthesized aspects of reality. While there is a hierarchical 
organization, multiple parallel processing pathways also exist, consistent with 
observational neuroscientific data (e.g. dorsal and ventral visual pathways). 

5 
6. Consciousness at the apex - Consciousness arises at the highest-order delay coordinate 
embedding engines in this hierarchy, with multiple parallel highest-order delay 
coordinate embedding engines competing to give rise to different complex behavioral 
options available to the conscious entity. 
7. Consciousness as process - Given that delay coordinate embedding is a process that 
requires signal processing to occur over time, neuronally implemented delay coordinate 
embedding engines require that information processing occur over time in order to 
represent aspects of reality. This implies that consciousness occurs as a process and 
cannot be represented within a static neuronal state. 
8. History-dependent development - The specifics of how each individual brain processes 
information is determined in a history-dependent manner. The instantiation of specific 
aspects of reality within an individual's brain, even at the earliest level of cortical 
processing, are similar but not identical. Thus, each individual brain instantiates their 
representation of reality in a similar but unique manner. This results, ultimately, in qualia 
and consciousness being private and non-shareable. 
9. Nonlinear dynamics - The delay coordinate embedding engines themselves are nonlinear 
dynamical systems sensitive to initial conditions when performing state space 
categorization. A given representation of reality is selected based on initial conditions. 
This provides a physiologic basis for commonly observed phenomena such as binocular 
rivalry and perception of ambiguous figures such as the Necker cube. 
10. Limbic modulation - Under the State Space Theory, the highest order delay coordinate 
embedding engines are modulated diffusely by limbic projections, giving rise to 
emotional qualia as well as affecting decision-making.  

6 
Together, these ideas form the core of the State Space Theory. The overarching 
hypothesis is that the cortex employs delay coordinate embedding to process sensory 
information, creating a hierarchy of state space representations that give rise to consciousness at 
the highest levels of the hierarchy. Crucially, this process is generic, occurs over time, develops 
in a history-dependent manner, and exhibits nonlinear dynamics.  
 
Neuronal Firing as Time Series Data 
 
Leaving aside panpsychist or quantum theories of consciousness, the core informational 
unit of neuronal systems is the action potential.(Byrne 2023) In response to sensory input, 
neurons adjust their firing patterns, achieving firing rates approaching 1000 Hz but more 
typically with an upper bound in the 200 Hz range.(Wang et al. 2016) What is less clear is the 
computational mechanism that transforms these neuronal firing patterns into coherent perceptual 
experiences and higher-order cognitive phenomena. This has yet to be defined even within 
simple model systems such as the 302-neuron Caenorhabditis elegans.(Hobert 2018) Powerful 
modern machine learning approaches have been used to identity what neurons in these systems 
are doing, but have yet to identify how.(Atanas et al. 2023; Chang et al. 2023) 
 
Let us begin with the view that neuronal action potentials represent time series data. 
Though discretized into binary signals (firing/not firing), it is well established that summation 
through excitation and inhibition occurs at the dendritic level, resulting in the ability of neurons 
to process information nonlinearly.(Payeur et al. 2019; Larkum et al. 2018)  

7 
 
It is into this context that I introduce a mathematical technique commonly used in the 
analysis of complex systems. This technique, called delay coordinate embedding, is used for 
attractor reconstruction in these systems. In 1981, Floris Takens demonstrated that the nonlinear 
dynamics of a strange attractor with a state space (phase space) of n dimensions can be 
reconstructed from a single observed variable using time-delayed copies of that variable as 
surrogates for the unobserved dimensions.(Takens 1981) 
More formally, given a time series x(t), a delay embedding can be constructed as a set of 
vectors y(t) = [x(t), x(t-τ), ..., x(t-(m-1)τ)] where τ is a fixed time delay and m is the embedding 
dimension. Under Taken's Theorem, with appropriate choice of τ and m, the reconstructed 
attractor y(t) preserves the topological and dynamical properties of the original system. 
The power of delay embedding lies in its ability to uncover hidden structure and 
determinism in seemingly complex or chaotic data. It has found wide application in fields 
ranging from physics and engineering to economics and climatology.(Kantz & Schreiber 2003) 
This deep and important theorem for the analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems has a 
seemingly trivial and trite use case in the analysis of simple dynamical systems. Take the 
example of a car moving on a two-dimensional circular racetrack, moving along dimensions 
(x,y). Let us say that all we have available to us is a measure of the velocity of that car in one 
dimension⊽x. As a function of time, ⊽x(t) takes the form of a sine wave (Figure 1, left panel). If 
we were to develop a delay embedding reconstruction of the behavior of this system using 
embedding dimension m = 2, a trivial exercise to perform, we would reconstruct the motion of 
the car; the reconstructed attractor of this system is a simple circle (Figure 1, right panel). The 

8 
reconstruction of the far more complex Lorenz attractor from a single observed dimension is also 
demonstrated (Figure 1, bottom). 
Thus, delay coordinate embedding is also a powerful tool for reconstructing and 
predicting the behavior of well-defined deterministic systems. The conceptual connection being 
made in this paper is that the reconstruction and prediction of deterministic systems, a primary 
function of the brain, is performed in the brain through dendritic integration of data via recurrent 
neural loops. Under this theory, recurrent networks in the brain represent a neuronal 
implementation of the delay coordinate embedding process. It is proposed that the brain's ability 
to construct meaningful representations from the raw time series data of neuronal firing patterns 
occurs through a process that is mathematically described by delay coordinate embedding. 
Specifically, the hypothesis being presented is that cortical microcircuits, centered around 
cortical columns, act as delay coordinate embedding engines. The recurrent connectivity within 
these microcircuits, spanning cortical layers and involving both excitatory and inhibitory 
neurons, provides the necessary architecture for integrating information by causing information 
(spiking activity) that is currently being presented to the system to be integrated with information 
that had previously been presented to the system via recurrent loops. A vastly simplified 
diagrammatic representation of a neuronally implemented delay coordinate embedding process is 
shown in Figure 2. This diagram, while instructive, is vastly simplified in several ways. In actual 
cortical networks, neurons have thousands or tens of thousands of synapses per dendrite, with a 
mixture of glutamatergic and cholinergic excitatory synapses, inhibitory GABAergic synapses, 
and synapses of other neurotransmitter types as well.(DeFelipe & Fariñas 1992) The diagram 

9 
lays out a view of the reconstruction of an attractor in low (m = 3) dimensional space using only 
one observed variable. Given the large amount of simultaneous information available to the 
cortex and the requirement for multiplexing of that information to develop a coherent 
reconstruction of reality, state space reconstruction of the cortex must be multivariable and is 
likely high dimensional as well (see e.g. Han et al for known approaches to multivariable 
reconstruction of state spaces using nonuniform embedding).(Han et al. 2019) 
There is a neuroanatomical basis for the implementation of delay coordinate embedding 
in the cerebral cortex. It is well established that there are a large number of feedback connections 
in the cerebral cortex, and that these feedback connections have important functional roles. 
Specific macroscopic loops include the cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop (Baladron & 
Hamker 2023; Parent & Hazrati 1995), the cortico-cerebellar loop (Ramnani 2006), the limbic 
loop (Papez's Circuit) (Shah et al. 2012), the oculomotor loop (Perrinet et al. 2014; Smith & 
Archibald 2020), and prefrontal cortex loops.(Badre & Nee 2018; Fuster 2015) Dysfunction of or 
interruption to these recurrent loops result in a wide variety of neurological and psychiatric 
disorders, including depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. 
Cytoarchitecture at the cortical column level also supports local recurrent loops 
consistent with a delay coordinate embedding neural analogue. A cortical column is a vertically 
organized group of neurons within the cortex. The idea of the cortical column was first 
introduced by Vernon Mountcastle in the 1950s.(Mountcastle 1957; Wikipedia contributors 
2023) Mountcastle's work showed that neurons in a given vertical column of the cortex, spanning 
all six layers, often respond to similar types of stimuli. This observation led to the idea that the 
cortical column serves as a fundamental unit of information processing in the brain. Cortical 

10 
columns typically contain about 10,000 neurons, although the exact number can vary across 
different species and cortical regions. In humans, estimates vary from 100,000 total columns in 
the neocortex to upwards of 2 million.(Landing et al. 1998; Krueger et al. 2008) Within a 
column, so-called minicolumns are organized, with short-range connections between them. 
These neurons are interconnected in complex ways, forming both local loops within the column 
and connecting to other columns and brain regions.(Schubert et al. 2007; Fox 2018) 
There are feedback connections to subcortical structures such as the thalamus  and 
hippocampus as well. These abundant feedback connections in the cortex are essentially 
delivering old information back to the same dendritic tree that is receiving current information, 
after a delay. The ability of old information to interact with the newer information at the level of 
the dendritic tree has clear analogies to delay coordinate embedding. Under this hypothesis, the 
representation of reconstruction space is spread out over the neural network, with subnetworks 
representing various parts of that reconstruction space.  The recurrent networks, and coincidence 
detection occurring in the dendritic tree, would represent accessing various parts of reconstructed 
space. Furthermore, the synaptic weights would be continuously (albeit slowly) updated over 
time, resulting in learning by the neural network. Though dendritic integration can occur over 
hundreds of milliseconds, it is more typical for this integration to occur on the scale of tens of 
milliseconds, corresponding to a frequency of 40-80Hz -- precisely the beta and gamma range 
frequencies that are known to be associated with conscious experience.(Kirch & Gollo 2020; 
Purdon et al. 2015) 
Under this hypothesis, the neurobiological details underlying the ability of recurrent 
neural networks to first learn and then access reconstructions of reality would involve a complex 
interplay between cholinergic and glutamatergic signaling (on the excitatory side) and 

11 
GABAergic signaling (on the inhibitory side); the formation and pruning of new synapses; and 
the modulation of this signaling by myriad other widely-projecting neurotransmitter systems 
(primarily, dopaminergic, serotonergic, and peptide systems). The specific neurobiology of the 
development of these systems has and continues to be the subject of deep study across the 
neuroscientific community. The State Space Theory offers a framework by which to understand 
the overall trajectory by which the brain reconstructs models of reality and gives rise to 
conscious experience. 
This hypothesis is consistent with observations of neuropsychiatric conditions that arise 
from demyelinating disorders such as multiple sclerosis. Myelin is a fatty covering found on the 
axons of some neurons, and facilitates a process called saltatory conduction which dramatically 
accelerates the speed of the action potential along the length of the axon. Demyelination, then, 
would be expected to reduce the speed of signals along the axon and disrupt delay coordinate 
embedding processes.  
Analogously, any process that disrupts high-frequency components of the delay 
embedding processes - particularly those that would act across broader areas of the cortex - 
would be expected to cause disruption of consciousness. Thus, the State Space Theory offers a 
long-sought final common pathway for sedation and general anesthesia. Under this theory, 
general anesthesia can be induced in a variety of ways - through action at GABA receptors, 
NMDA receptors, or through disruption of cellular energetics and result impacts on 
neurotransmitter endocytosis.(Weir 2006; Jung et al. 2022; Lambert 2020) 
 
State Space Exemplars 
Color Vision 

12 
In standard trichromatic human vision, three retinal types of cone cells are responsible for 
mediating color vision at the level of input signal to the eye. These cone cells contain pigments 
sensitive to short, medium, and long wavelength visual light, corresponding to the S-, M-, and L-
type classification of these photoreceptive cells.(Carroll & Conway 2021) From a state space 
perspective, color (hue) can be seen as a state space in three dimensions (Figure 3, top). 
Certainly, this is a naive perspective that does not take into account the known aspects of color 
processing that occurs at multiple levels, beginning as early as the retina and continuing through 
early visual cortex up (V1) through higher-order cortical areas responsible for visual processing 
(V3, V4). Regardless, a state space perspective on color vision is, at minimum, an informative 
and useful way to conceptualize the dimensions of known color vision. For example, loss of the 
M-type photoreceptor results in deuteranopia, the most common form of color deficiency. Figure 
3 (bottom) provides a state space representation of color accessibility for deuteranopia. Under the 
State Space Theory, the qualia for the color space available to deuteranopes remains private. 
Many attempts have been made to simulate the experience of humans with color deficiency but it 
should be clear that these are just simulations rather than a true representation of the qualia of 
those with color deficiencies. 
It is clear from observational data that color vision appears to be modular in the building 
of the representation of objects in perception. Oliver Sacks famously describes the case of 
Jonathan I in "The Case of the Colorblind Painter."(Sacks 1995) As a result of damage to areas 
on the ventral occipital cortex, subjects with cerebral achromatopsia have complete loss of color 
vision.(Bouvier & Engel 2006) This was described by Jonathan I in stark terms - everything 
"utterly gray and void of color… not just that colors were missing, but that what he did see had a 

13 
distasteful, 'dirty' look, the whites glaring, yet discolored and off-white, the blacks cavernous — 
everything wrong, unnatural, stained, and impure." 
This is consistent with the State Space Theory, which posits that the brain constructs 
perceptual experiences by navigating and integrating multidimensional state spaces. Damage to 
specific cortical areas disrupts the neural processes that construct the 'color' state space, resulting 
in the specific perceptual deficit of achromatopsia without concomitant loss of other perceptual 
capabilities (assuming brain damage is restricted to just color processing). The modular nature of 
color processing is reflected in how the brain segregates and processes different dimensions of 
visual information, feeding it forward into the construction of a coherent perceptual experience 
based on an integrated combination of lower order state spaces. 
 
Motion Perception 
Motion perception provides another exemplar of the State Space Theory. The brain's 
ability to perceive motion relies on integrating temporal sequences of visual information, 
constructing a state space that represents dynamic changes in the environment. Neurons in the 
medial temporal (MT) area of the visual cortex are specifically tuned to detect motion direction 
and speed.(Solomon et al. 2011) These neurons process sequential visual inputs, integrating them 
into a coherent perception of motion. 
The State Space Theory explains motion perception as the brain's ability to reconstruct 
state spaces that capture temporal changes in visual stimuli. This dynamic state space allows the 
brain to predict and interpret motion, integrating information over time to create a unified 

14 
perception of moving objects. Under the State Space Theory, it is the recurrent loops and 
feedback connections within the visual cortex that facilitate this integration, serving as the 
computational mechanism and explanation by which univariate neuron firing results in the ability 
of the MT area (in general) to discriminate motion. Using purely one-dimensional data, it would 
(under Taken's Theorem) be expected that the neuronal network would be making use of an 
embedding dimension of at least 7 to reconstruct the behavior of an object moving through three 
dimensional space (embedding dimension m is calculated as greater than or equal to twice the 
underlying dimensionality d plus one).(Takens 1981) As the brain makes use of multichannel 
data, it is possible that the neuronal network uses a smaller embedding dimension. 
 
Depth Perception 
Depth perception, the ability to perceive the world in three dimensions, also aligns well 
with the State Space Theory. The brain uses various cues, such as binocular disparity, motion 
parallax, and texture gradients, to construct a three-dimensional state space that represents 
depth.(Howard 2012) Neurons in the primary visual cortex (V1) and higher visual areas, such as 
the dorsal stream, process these cues to create a coherent perception of depth. 
The State Space Theory posits that depth perception arises from the brain's ability to 
integrate multiple sensory inputs into a unified state space. This integration involves 
reconstructing spatial relationships between objects, allowing the brain to interpret and navigate 
the three-dimensional environment. Under the theory, the hierarchical processing of depth cues, 
from V1 to higher-order visual areas, supports the construction of a multidimensional state space 

15 
that represents the spatial structure of the environment. This information would then be joined 
with other state space representations to create a representation that binds e.g. object, color, 
motion into a unified percept in a higher order delay coordinate embedding engine. 
 
Implications of Plasticity for Cortical Computation 
There are some key constraints about the way that information must be processed by the 
brain related to plasticity, genetic limitations, and robustness of the network. The mammalian 
cortex exhibits a striking degree of gross scale plasticity. This plasticity is classically exemplified 
by experiments describing the patterning of ocular dominance columns observed by Wiesel and 
Hubel in kittens.(Berardi et al. 2003) In these experiments, Hubel and Wiesel discovered that eye 
closure during the first six months of life led to a functional, permanent disconnection between 
the closed eye and the cortex, even though the retina of the closed eye remained intact. 
Furthermore, the functional eye was preferentially represented in the cortex. This was the first 
demonstration of Hebb’s Rule: the “fire-together, wire-together” principle.   
Another example is the role of occipital cortex in Braille reading. Functional MRI and 
rTMS studies have together established that regions of the cortex that areas normally devoted to 
visual processing are, in fact, recruited in congenitally blind subjects to subserve the reading of 
Braille.(Pascual-Leone & Torres 1993; Kupers et al. 2007) Massive cortical reorganization and 
plasticity have also been noted in sighted subjects who underwent an intensive Braille-reading 
training regimen.(Siuda-Krzywicka et al. 2016) 

16 
Interindividual variability in otherwise healthy subjects also demonstrates the deep role 
that plasticity plays within the context of normal development. In an fMRI study of subjects 
viewing grating patterns, Kamitani and Tong were able to train a simple machine learning 
algorithm to predict the grating that a subject was observing using only fMRI data from visual 
cortex.(Kamitani & Tong 2005) However, an algorithm trained on one subject could not be used 
to predict on another subject. Why? Even in the early primary visual cortex, there is substantial 
interindividual variability in the specific pattern of cortical areas that are sensitive to specific 
grating orientations.  
These and many other examples amount to a well-established plethora of evidence of 
plasticity found within the mammalian cortex. The presence of plasticity - this ability of the brain 
to recruit unused or underused neuronal circuitry to subserve new and, in some cases, completely 
different processing tasks - has important implications for the way that information processing 
must occur in cortex. 
Specifically, it implies that cortical mechanisms of information processing are, at least to 
some extent, generic. Returning to observations related to Braille-reading patients, the rTMS 
study in particular underscores the point that the occipital cortex is not merely recruited to fire in 
the presence of tactile stimuli, but is in fact functionally important for the reading of 
Braille.(Kupers et al. 2007) The circuits involved in the analysis of the incoming visual data 
were somehow recruited to functionally process incoming tactile data instead. If cortical 
information processing systems were highly specialized to subserve particular tasks, this would 
not be possible. 
In addition to plasticity, the size of the human genome also strongly suggests that cortical 
information processing must be heuristic in nature. There are only about 20,000 protein coding 

17 
genes in the human genome, far fewer than previously expected (this number goes up when 
accounting for splice variants, but is on the same order of magnitude).(Nurk et al. 2022) This 
relatively small number of genes makes it vanishingly unlikely that the blueprints for highly 
specialized neural circuitry for the processing of visual, auditory, tactile, proprioceptive, 
linguistic, and other types of data are hardcoded into the genome. Indeed, it is far more likely 
that the genetic specification of cortical structure gives rise to a system that is able to ‘pull itself 
up by its own bootstraps’ to learn the rules of reality and perform any other processing tasks 
important for survival. 
Delay coordinate embedding and the State Space Theory provide just such a 
computational platform to explain this generic yet highly adaptable nature of cortical processing. 
The concept of delay coordinate embedding, rooted in chaos theory and complex systems 
analysis, allows the brain to dynamically reconstruct state spaces from temporal sequences of 
neural inputs. This reconstruction process involves recurrent loops and feedback mechanisms 
that integrate past data with current sensory inputs, providing an explanatory framework for 
learning and adaptation in a continuously evolving neural environment, including adaptability 
and recruitment of brain areas to subserve new tasks in the context of congenital disorders or 
trauma. 
 
Nonlinear Dynamical Computational Engines 
 
It was mentioned in the introduction that delay coordinate embedding engines are 
themselves nonlinear dynamical deterministic systems. This aspect merits a bit more expansion, 
as it is a key feature that arises from the State Space Theory and provides additional explanatory 
power for crucial aspects of our intuition of consciousness. 

18 
 
As outlined above, neuronally implemented delay coordinate embedding engines are 
comprised of neural networks that engage in recurrent processing, with integration of time 
delayed data occurring at the level of the dendrite. The complexity of this recurrent processing 
and time-delayed data integration renders these systems nonlinear and dynamical. This means 
that the state of the system at any given moment is influenced not just by the immediate inputs, 
but also by the history of past inputs and the interactions within the system. Nonlinear dynamical 
systems are known for their sensitivity to initial conditions, leading to phenomena such as chaos 
and bifurcations. 
The nonlinearity and sensitivity to initial conditions provide a basis for understanding 
some of the more mysterious aspects of consciousness. For example, the subjective experience of 
consciousness, or qualia, can be seen as emerging from the complex interactions and feedback 
loops within these nonlinear systems. The same input can lead to different conscious experiences 
depending on the prior state of the system and the exact dynamics at play. To return to the 
example of ambiguous figures mentioned in the introduction, such as the Necker cube or Rubin's 
vase, these perceptual phenomena can be explained by the brain's nonlinear dynamical 
processing. When presented with such ambiguous stimuli, the brain does not have a single, static 
representation but rather multiple potential interpretations that compete with each other (Figure 
4). The final conscious percept that emerges can shift between these interpretations depending on 
subtle changes in the neural network's state or initial conditions, due to the sensitivity to initial 
conditions characteristic of nonlinear systems. 
Another critical implication of viewing delay coordinate embedding engines as nonlinear 
dynamical systems is their capacity for producing emergent properties. Emergence occurs when 
a system exhibits properties or behaviors that are not evident from the sum of its parts. In the 

19 
context of consciousness, this means that the intricate interplay of numerous simple neural 
components can give rise to the complex, integrated experience that we identify as conscious 
awareness. This emergent property of consciousness aligns with our intuition that consciousness 
is more than just the activity of individual neurons but a product of the collective dynamics of 
the brain. However, it should be made clear that the State Space Theory offers substance to the 
idea that 'consciousness is an emergent phenomenon.' The theory provides a specific mechanism 
by which this emergence occurs. Through a neurobiological implementation of Takens' 
Theorem, these systems learn and then reconstruct models of reality through neurobiologically 
instantiated state space representations of aspects of reality. In this case emergence, sometimes 
viewed perhaps as handwaving, is grounded with specific mechanistic and computational 
underpinning. 
This theoretical framework also provides insights into phenomena such as binocular 
rivalry, where conflicting images presented to each eye lead to alternating perceptions rather than 
a single, stable image. The recurrent, history-dependent processing within delay coordinate 
embedding engines allows for the dynamic competition and switching between different neural 
representations, reflecting the brain's response to conflicting inputs. 
In practical terms, this theory suggests that any attempt to alter consciousness, such as 
through anesthesia or neurostimulation, must account for the nonlinear dynamics of these 
systems. Disrupting the timing or connectivity within these recurrent networks can lead to 
significant changes in conscious experience, as seen in the effects of various anesthetics and 
psychoactive substances. The nonlinear dynamics also imply that small changes in neural 
activity can sometimes lead to disproportionately large changes in conscious experience. 

20 
A discussion of the nonlinear dynamical properties of the brain would be incomplete 
without a discussion of brain systems existing at the so-called edge of criticality. It has been 
demonstrated at both the macro- and micro-scale that the brain exhibits behaviors characteristic 
of certain types of chaotic systems; namely that the brain obeys power law relationships, scale 
invariance, and self-organized criticality.(Werner 2009) Destabilization of these features is 
associated with general anesthesia.(Eisen et al. 2024) These features support the presence of 
nonlinear dynamics in the brain (self-evident even from the examination of the functioning of a 
single neuron) but more importantly are the macro features that likely underpin the ways in 
which brain development supports and gives rise, through self-organization, to the heuristic, 
generic information processing hypothesized in this paper. Indeed, it has been hypothesized (and 
early work has shown) that the systems operating at the edge of chaos are optimized for 
adaptability and computational power.(Beggs 2008) 
 
The Doerig et al Criteria 
As mentioned in the introduction, the criteria laid out by Doerig and colleagues provides 
a valuable starting point for evaluating the State Space Theory of consciousness. The authors 
were motivated by a desire to develop a method to compare theories of consciousness, to 
stimulate discussion and debate with respect to the relative explanatory power of various 
theories, and to provide a framework for understanding how the predictions of a given theory 
could potentially be falsified experimentally. 
 

21 
Paradigm Cases 
It has already been outlined the ways in which the State Space Theory addresses specific 
paradigm cases of consciousness: cortical blindness, general anesthesia, and ambiguous figures, 
to name a few. The State Space Theory also accounts for sleep and in particular dreamless sleep. 
Under the State Space Theory, wakefulness and dreaming states would be accounted for by 
integrative recurrent processing through delay coordinate embedding engines. By contrast, 
dreamless sleep would be accounted for through brain activity that subserves known functions of 
dreamless sleep including clearance of neuroprotective clearance of metabolic waste and 
memory formation.(Eugene & Masiak 2015; Rasch & Born 2013) In particular, the fact that deep 
sleep is associated with slow wave states is strongly consistent with the State Space Theory 
approach; under the State Space Theory, higher-frequency brain activity is requisite for dendritic 
processing giving rise to delay coordinate embedded reconstruction of state spaces; slow wave 
activity would be too slow for dendritic integration to give rise to reconstructed state spaces. This 
is similar to the aforementioned common final mechanism for general anesthesia as proposed 
under the State Space Theory. 
 
Unfolding 
The unfolding argument has likewise already been touched upon. Perhaps the most 
powerful argument against integrated information theory (IIT) and other causal models of 
consciousness is the unfolding argument.(Doerig et al. 2019) This argument posits that any 
recurrent neural network (RNN) can be unfolded into a feedforward neural network (FNN) that 

22 
implements the same input-output function. This argument makes use of the fact that both RNN 
and FNN are universal function approximators in order to make this claim. On this view, 
recurrent causal structures are neither necessary nor sufficient to explain consciousness, as any 
input-output function implemented in RNN can be implemented in FNN. 
The State Space Theory (SST) provides a robust rebuttal to this argument in several 
ways. However, in order to provide a detailed rebuttal, we need to go all the way back to the 
definition of an algorithm. Succinctly, Evans describes it thus: 
 
Computer science is the study of information processes… A procedure is a description of 
a process. A simple process can be described just by listing the steps. The list of steps is 
the procedure; the act of following them is the process. A procedure that can be followed 
without any thought is  called a mechanical procedure. An algorithm is a mechanical 
procedure that is guaranteed to eventually finish. (Evans 2011) 
 
 
Much has been written about Gödel's Incompleteness Theorems, Turing's Halting 
Problem, and the relationship of these to the nature of human cognition. Sir Roger Penrose, in 
The Emperor's New Mind, famously wrote, "A plausible case can be made that there is an 
essential non-algorithmic ingredient to (conscious) thought processes." (Penrose 1989) While it 
is beyond the scope of this article to review these considerations in full, in brief, they provide a 
critical backdrop for understanding the limits of computation and their implications for theories 
of consciousness, including the State Space Theory. Kurt Gödel’s theorems demonstrate that in 
any sufficiently powerful mathematical system, there are propositions that cannot be proven or 
disproven within the system. This implies that no formal system can be both complete and 

23 
consistent. For consciousness, this suggests that the human mind might operate beyond the 
constraints of formal systems, potentially engaging in non-computable processes. Alan Turing 
proved that there is no general algorithm that can determine whether any given program will halt 
or run indefinitely. This highlights a fundamental limit of algorithmic computation, suggesting 
that some aspects of human cognition might also be non-algorithmic, as proposed by Penrose 
and others.  
 
However, if we return to the definition of an algorithm (a process that must terminate), 
one can write a non-algorithmic program to describe human consciousness: 
 
while (System.Alive) {be_conscious();} 
This trivial and rather unsatisfying pseudocode represents a non-algorithmic process; it will not 
terminate while the interesting case of System.Alive is true. Perhaps we can update it to be 
slightly more interesting: 
while (System.Alive) { 
switch(ARAS_Mode){ 
case ARAS_Modes.Mode_Awake: be_conscious(); break; 
case ARAS_Modes.Mode_REM: be_less_conscious(); break; 
case ARAS_Modes.Mode_NREM: break; 
} 
 
These are, of course, frivolous examples of non-algorithmic processes. And if 
be_conscious() is an algorithm, a defined set of input-output steps that is continuously 
returned to in a loop, then we are back to the Godel-Turing-Penrose conundrum. The State Space 

24 
Theory goes further in defining consciousness as a non-algorithmic process, and therefore not 
unfoldable, in two distinct ways.  
First, a crucial aspect of the theory is that delay coordinate embedding is not an algorithm 
but rather a process. Delay coordinate embedding involves creating state space representations 
through integration of temporal sequences of data. It is only within the dynamical evolution of 
the system that representations of reality can be instantiated. As a process that inherently requires 
recurrent loops to integrate information over time, this process cannot be fully replicated by 
static FNNs as there is no process in an FNN where data can be returned to an earlier point in the 
network to modulate new information entering this system. . The dynamic reconstruction of state 
spaces allows for the integration of past data into current processing, emphasizing the role of 
temporal dynamics in generating conscious experience. Because the theory views the neuronal 
processes giving rise to consciousness as processes rather than as input-output algorithms, the 
unfolding argument is obviated. 
Moreover, the State Space Theory posits that the brain's recurrent networks are 
continuously evolving, shaped by the history of their inputs. In order for a formally defined 
input-output RNN to be unfolded to an equivalent FNN, it is a prerequisite that the underlying 
neural network remain unchanged as the equivalent FNN processes sequential inputs. History-
dependent changes to the neural network under the State Space Theory - and as supported by 
abundant neurobiological evidence of synaptic plasticity - again undercuts the argument that 
brain-based recurrent neural networks can be unfolded to an equivalent FNN without losing 
essential aspects of their function. Continuous changes in the underlying neural network result in 
a system that behaves in a non-algorithmic manner. 

25 
Small and Large Network Arguments 
The State Space Theory inherently addresses the small and large network arguments. 
With respect to small networks, the theory posits that consciousness arises from the integration 
within higher-order delay coordinate embedding engines. This requires complex, large-scale 
recurrent networks. Simple networks lack the necessary complexity and hierarchical structure to 
implement the delay coordinate embedded reconstruction processes fully. With respect to the 
large network argument, again, the State Space Theory specifically identifies that it is the higher-
order delay coordinate embedding engines that give rise to consciousness. While reliant upon the 
lower order engines in order to provide basic processing, it is the higher-order elements of the 
network that are associated with consciousness itself. The hierarchical arrangement allows the 
State Space Theory to explain how consciousness can be both distributed and integrated across 
the cortex. 
Other Systems Argument 
With respect to the other systems argument, the response of the State Space Theory is 
straightforward: there is nothing special about the human brain. Any processing system that 
gives rise to hierarchically arranged delay coordinate embedded representations of the input 
signals, with a sufficient number of levels in the hierarchy, would give rise to consciousness. 
Certainly, what is less clear is what constitutes a sufficient number of levels. It is most 
straightforward to posit under this theory that there is a minimum number of levels below which 
no there is no conscious experience. Above this number of levels, consciousness would be 
viewed as arising with increasing richness and diversity of the associated conscious experience. 

26 
It is indubitable that even the smallest mammalian brains meet sufficient criteria for some sort of 
conscious experience. 
 
Other Theories of Consciousness 
A thorough review and comparison to other major theories of consciousness is beyond 
the scope of this introductory article. That said, it has been pointed out by Doerig and colleagues 
and others that theories of consciousness have tended to be proffered by their authors in 
isolation, ignoring the broader context within which they are being offered and failing to 
compare and contrast the offered theory with existing ideas about the nature of 
consciousness.(Doerig et al. 2021; Seth & Bayne 2022; Storm et al. 2024) As such, a brief 
comparison to the major theories of the day is warranted, to highlight alignments, discrepancies, 
and opportunities for debate and discussion. 
 
Higher-Order Theories (HOTs) 
Higher-Order Theories (HOTs) posit that a mental state becomes conscious when it is the 
target of a higher-order representation, which is a meta-representation of the agent's own mental 
state.(Seth & Bayne 2022) These theories emphasize the role of anterior cortical regions, 
especially the prefrontal cortex, in supporting these meta-representations. Both HOTs and the 
State Space Theory support a hierarchical organization of mental states. The State Space 
Theory's pseudo-hierarchical arrangement of delay coordinate embedding engines aligns with 
HOTs' requirement for higher-order representations. Likewise, the State Space Theory's concept 

27 
of delay coordinate embedding engines creating representations of reality could be seen as a 
form of meta-representation, though the State Space Theory does not explicitly focus on meta-
cognitive states. HOTs emphasize anterior cortical regions, particularly the prefrontal cortex, 
while the State Space Theory suggests that consciousness arises from the highest-order 
embedding engines distributed across the cortex, some of which may indeed be commonly 
localized to anterior cortical regions. In sum, the State Space Theory could be viewed as in many 
ways providing a mechanistic explanation of HOTs. 
 
Global Workspace Theories (GWTs) 
Global Workspace Theories propose that consciousness arises when information is 
globally broadcasted within a widespread neuronal workspace, particularly involving fronto-
parietal regions.(Seth & Bayne 2022) This theory highlights the integration and sharing of 
information across different brain regions. The State Space Theory’s hierarchical delay 
coordinate embedding engines support the idea of integrating information across different levels, 
providing a mechanistic underpinning to GWT’s global workspace. Both theories recognize the 
importance of recurrent processing in achieving consciousness. The State Space Theory’s 
recurrent delay coordinate embedding engines align with GWT’s recurrent network ignitions. 
GWTs emphasize a specific neural workspace, often centered on fronto-parietal networks; while 
the State Space Theory posits a more distributed network involving various delay coordinate 
embedding engines, again (similar to the discussion on HOTs), there is no aspect of the State 
Space Theory that would exclude the importance of specific networks for consciousness - with 

28 
the specific exception that there are likely paradigm cases (such as, for example, the Hogan 
craniopagus twins) which the State Space Theory would handle better.(Cochrane 2021) The 
State Space Theory’s detailed computational mechanism of delay coordinate embedding is 
distinct from GWT's broader concept of global broadcasting. 
 
Integrated Information Theory (IIT) 
Integrated Information Theory (IIT) links consciousness to the amount of integrated 
information (Φ) generated by a system. IIT posits that high levels of integrated information, 
particularly in the posterior cortex, are crucial for consciousness.(Albantakis et al. 2023) Under 
the State Space Theory, delay coordinate embedding engines create integrated representations of 
reality, which can be seen as a form of integrated information. The non-linear dynamics and 
sensitivity to initial conditions in State Space Theory can also align with IIT’s focus on complex 
information integration. While State Space Theory does not explicitly prioritize posterior cortical 
areas, the distributed nature of delay coordinate embedding engines can encompass areas that IIT 
identifies as crucial. The State Space Theory also solves some fundamental problems with IIT, 
namely the possibility that IIT could ascribe consciousness to entities that are not intuitively 
conscious; simpler recurrent networks with an insufficient number of levels in the hierarchy 
would not be expected to give rise to consciousness under the State Space Theory. In the 
parlance of IIT, we might state that there is a minimum nonzero Φ associated with conscious 
experience. As a contrast between the two theories, the State Space Theory does not offer any 

29 
quantitative measure of consciousness, an advantage that IIT offers. There are likely ways to 
align the theories that would augment both.   
 
Re-Entry and Predictive Processing Theories 
Re-entry and Predictive Processing Theories (RPTs) emphasize the importance of top-
down and bottom-up signaling, with a focus on recurrent, re-entrant pathways to enable 
conscious perception.(Seth & Bayne 2022) The State Space Theory’s reliance on recurrent 
networks for delay coordinate embedding aligns closely with the emphasis on re-entrant 
pathways in RPTs. 
Likewise, the history-dependent development and non-linear dynamics in State Space 
Theory align with the principles of predictive coding, where past experiences influence current 
perceptions. RPTs provide additional detail with respect to specific neural pathways in ways that 
augment the State Space Theory; the State Space Theory offers an advantage here in that it 
provides a computational mechanism that underlies the predictive models emphasized in RPTs. 
 
Philosophical Considerations 
The State Space Theory offers some remarkable advantages with respect to philosophical 
considerations and quandaries. A brief analysis is offered here; a fuller consideration is again 
beyond the scope of this manuscript. 
 

30 
Dualism 
Dualism, the view that mind and body are fundamentally distinct, has long been a 
contentious issue in the philosophy of mind. State Space Theory, being rooted in physicalist and 
computational principles, aligns with monist perspectives and seeks to explain consciousness 
through the interactions and dynamics of physical neural systems. This approach inherently 
rejects dualism by providing a framework that explains consciousness as an emergent property of 
physical neural activity. However, due to the requirement of a temporal element in the 
reconstruction of state spaces using delay coordinate embedding, the State Space Theory offers 
an intriguing answer to the problem of dualist concepts that are, on their face, intuitive. Under 
the State Space Theory, the mind is, indeed, something different from the brain. A static brain 
has no mental component, nor does a specific brain state. It is only a brain 'in flight' - actively 
reconstructing ever more complex state spaces - that gives rise to mental phenomena and 
conscious experiences. It is a category error to talk of mental states. Consciousness is a verb. 
Thus, while the mind and brain are not fundamentally different substances as dualism suggests, 
the State Space Theory introduces a dynamic element to the discussion. Consciousness is not a 
property of the brain in a fixed state but emerges from the brain's dynamic processes over time. 
This dynamic view aligns with process philosophy, which emphasizes becoming over 
being and sees processes as more fundamental than static entities. The State Space Theory posits 
that the brain, through its continuous engagement in delay coordinate embedding, generates the 
flow of conscious experience. The mind, therefore, is the activity of the brain, not a separate 
entity or a mere collection of brain states. This perspective resolves some dualist intuitions by 
acknowledging that the brain's dynamic nature is essential for consciousness, thus providing a 

31 
more nuanced understanding that bridges the gap between physicalist monism and dualist 
intuitions. 
 
The Hard Problem of Consciousness 
The hard problem of consciousness, as formulated by David Chalmers, concerns the 
question of why and how physical processes in the brain give rise to subjective 
experiences.(Chalmers 1995) This problem is often seen as a significant challenge for any 
physicalist theory of consciousness. The State Space Theory posits that consciousness is not just 
an emergent property of complex, nonlinear dynamical systems, but offers a specific mechanism 
for that emergence in the form of reconstructed and increasingly abstract and complex state 
spaces. By explaining how delay coordinate embedding allows for the integration and 
representation of information in a hierarchical manner, the State Space Theory provides a 
framework for understanding the emergence of subjective experiences from neural processes. 
The theory’s emphasis on the role of history-dependent development and nonlinear dynamics in 
shaping individual experiences aligns with the notion that subjective experiences, or qualia, arise 
from the unique patterns of neural activity shaped by an individual’s history and interactions. 
 
The Unity of Consciousness 
The unity of consciousness refers to the phenomenon where conscious experiences are 
integrated into a single, coherent whole, rather than fragmented or disconnected parts. The State 

32 
Space Theory explains the unity of consciousness through the hierarchical arrangement of delay 
coordinate embedding engines. Higher-order delay coordinate embedding engines integrate 
information from lower levels, creating a unified representation of reality. This hierarchical 
integration ensures that different aspects of sensory and cognitive processing are combined into a 
coherent conscious experience. The recurrent nature of neural networks in the State Space 
Theory further supports the integration and unity of conscious experiences by allowing 
continuous interaction and feedback between different neural processes. 
 
Privacy and Subjectivity of Experience 
One of the key features of conscious experience is its inherently private and subjective 
nature. Each individual’s experiences are uniquely their own and cannot be directly accessed by 
others. 
The State Space Theory posits that the specifics of how each brain processes information 
are shaped by an individual’s unique history. This leads to the private and non-shareable nature 
of conscious experiences, as each conscious entity's neural networks are uniquely configured 
based on their personal experiences and interactions with the environment. 
 
Free Will and Determinism 
The debate between free will and determinism questions whether human actions are 
determined by prior states and laws of nature or if individuals have the capacity to make free 

33 
choices. Our intuition that we have free will has been undermined by the conception of the 
universe as mechanistic and deterministic. This perhaps provides an explanation for the interest 
in and exploration of quantum theories of consciousness. Quantum mechanical phenomena, in 
particular probabilistic and stochastic aspects of quantum theory, provide (possibly) a pathway to 
free will under known physical laws. The State Space Theory of consciousness likewise offers a 
pathway to free will, but under the auspices of known aspects of nonlinear dynamical systems 
theory. Under chaos theory, systems may be deterministic and yet unpredictable. In a neural 
system employing a large number of nonlinear delay coordinate embedding engines, with 
multiple engines present at the highest level of the hierarchy, there arises the possibility of these 
systems acting in opposition to one another - multiple 'voices,'  modulated by limbic and other 
signals, presenting different possible behaviors in weighted ways, that represent, to an even 
higher order engine, possibilities for behavior to select amongst: free will. In future work, we 
will more rigorously explore these concepts in order to more specifically outline how the State 
Space Theory can imbue agency to neurobiological systems that meet specific design constraints 
and the evolutionary advantages implied by this agency. 
 
Conclusions, Challenges, and Future Directions 
In the present work, I have introduced the State Space Theory of consciousness in a 
comprehensive and yet, in some ways, quite brief manner. This theory, grounded in the physical 
and computational properties of neural networks, provides a robust framework for understanding 
the emergence and nature of consciousness. By focusing on delay coordinate embedding as a 
mechanism for the dynamic and hierarchical integration of information, the State Space Theory 

34 
offers a novel approach that aligns with many philosophical intuitions while also addressing key 
empirical and theoretical challenges. 
A key next step in the development of the State Space Theory is to explore the ways in 
which the theory offers specific, falsifiable predictions and gives rise to scientifically verifiable 
hypothesis testing. We have already seen that the State Space Theory offers a framework by 
which we can understand the mechanisms underlying general anesthesia and neuroplasticity and 
how it reconciles specific philosophical quandaries about consciousness. We will explore in 
future work how the State Space Theory is consistent with other known aspects of neuronal 
processing - e.g. with machine learning studies on C. elegans worms. The State Space Theory 
makes predictions that could be tested psychometrically. Specifically, there are known 
quandaries about event related potentials such as the readiness potential that occur prior to 
consciousness of the associated percept.(Piani et al. 2024) These event related potentials are 
altered in neurologic and psychiatric disease states.(Sur & Sinha 2009) The State Space Theory 
offers a window into how recurrent networks - giving rise to coherent, macroscopically 
observable electroencephalographic features - might be linked back to microscale processing and 
explain some of these quandaries. Transcranial magnetic stimulation studies could be designed to 
specifically target and interrupt recurrent processing in specific brain areas to assess for the 
impact on conscious experience in normal and diseased states, as well as in other altered states of 
consciousness (e.g. with exposure to psychedelics). These studies could be extended to neuronal 
microcircuitry using a combination of optogenetics and large scale in vivo neuronal recording, 
technologies that have only just begun to become available and computationally tractable. 
Key challenges for the theory include a number of disparate considerations. One element 
mentioned earlier is to detail the specific ways in which neurobiological networks are modified 

35 
to facilitate the learning and access of the myriad state space representations or models of reality. 
Another challenge is to identify which aspects of behavior and perhaps even which models of 
reality are inborn. This, a version of the age-old nature/nurture question, leads back to questions 
about how the neural plan, as implemented in fetal development and as dictated by the plan laid 
out in DNA and DNA-protein complexes, can specify specific information processing pathways. 
Presumably, these would give rise to inborn representations of reality that accrued evolutionary 
survival benefit. It should also be said that any such specification within the neural plan would 
carry a substantial computational burden on the underlying DNA -- hence, plasticity-mediated 
genericity to neural computation as the rule rather than as the exception. Another challenge to the 
theory stands apart: namely, as with any theory in science, that this theory cannot be proven but 
rather can only withstand the rigors of falsification. 
Another critical challenge faced by the State Space Theory relates to how implementation 
of high-dimensional and multivariable information is managed within the neurobiological system 
to avoid a number of computational traps and local minima that could be envisioned. Takens' 
Theorem grounds the theory, at core, as implementation of delay coordinate embedding within 
recurrent neural network systems. The challenge will be to detail how the vastly simplified 
Figure 2 is implemented in neural systems with excitatory, inhibitory, and modulatory signaling, 
with as many as 50,000 synapses to an individual neuron. Another challenge is to envision how 
state space representations of lower order perceptual phenomena are integrated and bound to 
form higher order representations, without resulting in excessive sparseness and result in a 'curse 
of dimensionality' - one of the aforementioned computational traps. This remains to be explored 
further in future work. 

36 
In conclusion, the State Space Theory offers a comprehensive and scientifically grounded 
explanation of consciousness that addresses many of the philosophical and empirical challenges 
that have long puzzled researchers. Future work will build on this framework to further explore 
the mechanisms of delay coordinate embedding, investigate the specific neural pathways 
involved, and develop empirical tests to validate the theory's predictions. By continuing to refine 
and expand the State Space Theory, we can advance our understanding of one of the most 
profound aspects of the human condition and move closer to solving the hard problem of 
consciousness. 
 
 

37 
Figures 
Figure 1: Examples of Delay Coordinate Embedding in the Reconstruction of Dynamical 
Systems Behavior. (left) Velocity time series data. This plot shows the velocity ⊽x(t) of a car 
moving along a circular racetrack as a function of time, depicted as a sine wave. (right) 
Reconstructed attractor with 𝑚=2 embedding dimensions: Using delay embedding with an 
embedding dimension of 2, this plot reconstructs the car's circular motion from the velocity data, 
revealing a circular attractor. (bottom) Lorenz attractor depicted using 3 state variables (x,y,z 
dimensions), extraction of one of the state variables as a univariate time series, and delay 
embedding of that univariate time series in three dimensions using time t and a first and second 
lagged dimension. Figures generated in R and RStudio. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
Figure 2: Hierarchical Delay Coordinate Embedding in Neuronal Networks. This figure 
illustrates the concept of hierarchical delay coordinate embedding within neuronal networks, as 
proposed by the State Space Theory of consciousness. Sensory input x(t) is received by Neuron 1 
and is processed through a series of recurrent loops involving Neurons 2 and 3. The recurrent 
connections between these neurons create a temporal sequence of embedded states, represented 
as x(t−1) and x(t−2). These embeddings are integrated over time, enabling the construction of 
state space representations that capture the dynamics of sensory information. Axon pathways 
(solid lines) and feedback connections to dendrites (dotted lines) are depicted to emphasize the 
recurrent nature of the network, essential for delay coordinate embedding and temporal 
integration of sensory data. 
 
 
 

39 
Figure 3: State space representation of color in three dimensions based on receptive cell type in 
trichromatic (top left and right) and dicromatic (bottom) vision.  
 
 
 

40 
Figure 4: Bistable ambiguous figures through the lens of the State Space Theory. (left) The 
commonly encountered elderly/young woman bistable image marked with a red arrow for the 
mouth of the elderly woman and a blue arrow for the nose of the young woman. (Public domain 
images.) (Anon 2023) (right) Attractor-based view of the brain favoring one percept or another, 
based on initial conditions. If the observer focuses on features associated with one stable percept, 
that percept will dominate. 
 
 

41 
References: 
Albantakis, L. et al., 2023. Integrated information theory (IIT) 4.0: Formulating the properties of 
phenomenal existence in physical terms. PLoS computational biology, 19(10), p.e1011465. 
Anon, 2023. Ambiguous Objects / WPClipart. Available at: 
https://www.wpclipart.com/signs_symbol/optical_illusions/ambiguous_object/ [Accessed August 25, 
2023]. 
Atanas, A.A. et al., 2023. Brain-wide representations of behavior spanning multiple timescales and states 
in C. elegans. Cell, 186(19), pp.4134–4151.e31. 
Badre, D. & Nee, D.E., 2018. Frontal Cortex and the Hierarchical Control of Behavior. Trends in 
cognitive sciences, 22(2), pp.170–188. 
Baladron, J. & Hamker, F.H., 2023. Re-Thinking the Organization of Cortico-Basal Ganglia-Thalamo-
Cortical Loops. Cognitive computation. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-023-10140-9. 
Berardi, N. et al., 2003. Molecular basis of plasticity in the visual cortex. Trends in neurosciences, 26(7), 
pp.369–378. 
Bouvier, S.E. & Engel, S.A., 2006. Behavioral deficits and cortical damage loci in cerebral 
achromatopsia. Cerebral cortex , 16(2), pp.183–191. 
Byrne, J.H., 2023. Chapter 1: Resting Potentials and Action Potentials. In J. H. Byrne, ed. Neuroscience 
Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences. Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy 
McGovern Medical School at The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston 
(UTHealth). 
Carroll, J. & Conway, B.R., 2021. Color vision. Handbook of clinical neurology, 178, pp.131–153. 
Chalmers, D., 1995. Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2(3), 
pp.200–219. 
Chang, A.S. et al., 2023. Measures of Information Content during Anesthesia and Emergence in the 
Caenorhabditis elegans Nervous System. Anesthesiology, 139(1), pp.49–62. 
Cochrane, T., 2021. A case of shared consciousness. Synthese, 199(1), pp.1019–1037. 
DeFelipe, J. & Fariñas, I., 1992. The pyramidal neuron of the cerebral cortex: morphological and 
chemical characteristics of the synaptic inputs. Progress in neurobiology, 39(6), pp.563–607. 
Doerig, A. et al., 2019. The unfolding argument: Why IIT and other causal structure theories cannot 
explain consciousness. Consciousness and cognition, 72, pp.49–59. 
Doerig, A., Schurger, A. & Herzog, M.H., 2021. Hard criteria for empirical theories of consciousness. 
Cognitive neuroscience, 12(2), pp.41–62. 
Eisen, A.J. et al., 2024. Propofol anesthesia destabilizes neural dynamics across cortex. Neuron, 0(0). 
Available at: http://www.cell.com/article/S089662732400446X/abstract [Accessed July 25, 2024]. 

42 
Eugene, A.R. & Masiak, J., 2015. The Neuroprotective Aspects of Sleep. MEDtube science, 3(1), pp.35–
40. 
Evans, D., 2011. Introduction to Computing: Explorations in Language, Logic, and Machines, 
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. 
Fox, K., 2018. Deconstructing the cortical column in the barrel cortex. Neuroscience, 368, pp.17–28. 
Fuster, J., 2015. The Prefrontal Cortex, Academic Press. 
Han, M. et al., 2019. Nonuniform State Space Reconstruction for Multivariate Chaotic Time Series. IEEE 
transactions on cybernetics, 49(5), pp.1885–1895. 
Hobert, O., 2018. Neurogenesis in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, WormBook. 
Howard, I.P., 2012. Perceiving in Depth, Volume 1: Basic Mechanisms, Oxford University Press. 
Jung, S. et al., 2022. Isoflurane inhibition of endocytosis is an anesthetic mechanism of action. Current 
biology: CB, 32(14), pp.3016–3032.e3. 
Kamitani, Y. & Tong, F., 2005. Decoding the visual and subjective contents of the human brain. Nature 
neuroscience, 8(5), pp.679–685. 
Kantz, H. & Schreiber, T., 2003. Nonlinear Time Series Analysis, Cambridge University Press. 
Kirch, C. & Gollo, L.L., 2020. Spatially resolved dendritic integration: towards a functional classification 
of neurons. PeerJ, 8, p.e10250. 
Krueger, J.M. et al., 2008. Sleep as a fundamental property of neuronal assemblies. Nature reviews. 
Neuroscience, 9(12), pp.910–919. 
Kupers, R. et al., 2007. rTMS of the occipital cortex abolishes Braille reading and repetition priming in 
blind subjects. Neurology, 68(9), pp.691–693. 
Lambert, D.G., 2020. Mechanisms of action of general anaesthetic drugs. Anaesthesia & Intensive Care 
Medicine, 21(5), pp.235–237. 
Landing, B.H., Shankle, W.R. & Hara, J., 1998. Constructing the human cerebral cortex during infancy 
and childhood: types and numbers of cortical columns and numbers of neurons in such columns at 
different age-points. Acta paediatrica Japonica; Overseas edition, 40(6), pp.530–543. 
Larkum, M.E. et al., 2018. A Perspective on Cortical Layering and Layer-Spanning Neuronal Elements. 
Frontiers in neuroanatomy, 12, p.56. 
Mountcastle, V.B., 1957. Modality and topographic properties of single neurons of cat’s somatic sensory 
cortex. Journal of neurophysiology, 20(4), pp.408–434. 
Nurk, S. et al., 2022. The complete sequence of a human genome. Science, 376(6588), pp.44–53. 
Parent, A. & Hazrati, L.N., 1995. Functional anatomy of the basal ganglia. I. The cortico-basal ganglia-
thalamo-cortical loop. Brain research. Brain research reviews, 20(1), pp.91–127. 

43 
Pascual-Leone, A. & Torres, F., 1993. Plasticity of the sensorimotor cortex representation of the reading 
finger in Braille readers. Brain: a journal of neurology, 116 ( Pt 1), pp.39–52. 
Payeur, A., Béïque, J.-C. & Naud, R., 2019. Classes of dendritic information processing. Current opinion 
in neurobiology, 58, pp.78–85. 
Penrose, R., 1989. The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of Physics, 
OUP Oxford. 
Perrinet, L.U., Adams, R.A. & Friston, K.J., 2014. Active inference, eye movements and oculomotor 
delays. Biological cybernetics, 108(6), pp.777–801. 
Piani, M.C. et al., 2024. Mapping the pre-reflective experience of “self” to the brain - An ERP study. 
Consciousness and cognition, 119(103654), p.103654. 
Purdon, P.L. et al., 2015. Clinical Electroencephalography for Anesthesiologists. Anesthesiology, 123(4), 
pp.937–960. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/aln.0000000000000841. 
Ramnani, N., 2006. The primate cortico-cerebellar system: anatomy and function. Nature reviews. 
Neuroscience, 7(7), pp.511–522. 
Rasch, B. & Born, J., 2013. About sleep’s role in memory. Physiological reviews, 93(2), pp.681–766. 
Sacks, O., 1995. An Anthropologist on Mars: Seven Paradoxical Tales, Knopf Doubleday Publishing 
Group. 
Schubert, D., Kötter, R. & Staiger, J.F., 2007. Mapping functional connectivity in barrel-related columns 
reveals layer- and cell type-specific microcircuits. Brain structure & function, 212(2), pp.107–119. 
Seth, A.K. & Bayne, T., 2022. Theories of consciousness. Nature reviews. Neuroscience, 23(7), pp.439–
452. 
Shah, A., Jhawar, S.S. & Goel, A., 2012. Analysis of the anatomy of the Papez circuit and adjoining 
limbic system by fiber dissection techniques. Journal of clinical neuroscience: official journal of the 
Neurosurgical Society of Australasia, 19(2), pp.289–298. 
Siuda-Krzywicka, K. et al., 2016. Massive cortical reorganization in sighted Braille readers. eLife, 5, 
p.e10762. 
Smith, D.T. & Archibald, N., 2020. Spatial working memory in Progressive Supranuclear Palsy. Cortex; 
a journal devoted to the study of the nervous system and behavior, 122, pp.115–122. 
Solomon, S.S. et al., 2011. Visual motion integration by neurons in the middle temporal area of a New 
World monkey, the marmoset. The Journal of physiology, 589(Pt 23), pp.5741–5758. 
Storm, J.F. et al., 2024. An integrative, multiscale view on neural theories of consciousness. Neuron, 
112(10), pp.1531–1552. 
Sur, S. & Sinha, V.K., 2009. Event-related potential: An overview. Industrial psychiatry journal, 18(1), 
pp.70–73. 

44 
Takens, F., 1981. Detecting strange attractors in turbulence. In Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Berlin 
Springer Verlag. p. 366. 
Wang, B. et al., 2016. Firing Frequency Maxima of Fast-Spiking Neurons in Human, Monkey, and 
Mouse Neocortex. Frontiers in cellular neuroscience, 10, p.239. 
Weir, C.J., 2006. The molecular mechanisms of general anaesthesia: dissecting the GABAA receptor. 
Continuing Education in Anaesthesia Critical Care & Pain, 6(2), pp.49–53. 
Werner, G., 2009. Consciousness related neural events viewed as brain state space transitions. Cognitive 
neurodynamics, 3(1), pp.83–95. 
Wikipedia contributors, 2023. Cortical column. Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Available at: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cortical_column&oldid=1146222509. 
 
 
 
