Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for
theories of consciousness
Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON
Asger Kirkeby-Hinrupa(akh@cfin.au.dk)
Morten Overgaardb(morten.storm.overgaard@cfin.au.dk)
Abstract
In recent years increasing attention has been given to systematic comparison of theories of
consciousness.
Laudable practical projects have emerged in this regard, such as adversarial
collaboration and the development of databases lending themselves to comparisons of empirical
support for theories. In addition to the practical advances, theoretical advances have been made,
such as a list of issues a theory of consciousness must address. We propose adding the issue
of the ontogenetic emergence (O-emergence) of consciousness to the list of issues we use to
evaluate theories of consciousness. O-emergence concerns how and when consciousness emerges
ontogenetically in human beings. The underlying assumption is that there exists a point in the
development of a human individual before which that individual is not and cannot be conscious.
This assumption, in turn, depends on a widely shared assumption of cognitive neuroscience,
which is that consciousness somehow depends on — or derives from — brain activity. In this paper,
we lay out the O-emergence criterion and investigate whether it can be accounted for within the
Global Neuronal Workspace theory, the Self-Organizing Meta-representational Account, and the
Reorganization of Elementary Functions framework.
Keywords
Consciousness ∙Criteria for theories ∙Emergence ∙Ontogenetics
1
Introduction
When it comes to consciousness, some questions are notoriously difficult to an-
swer. How does consciousness arise from brain activity? Why did consciousness
emerge at all? What, if anything, does consciousness enable us to do, that we
could not do without it? The first two of these questions correspond roughly
to the so-called hard problem of consciousness (Chalmers, 1995). When viewed
in light of metaphysics, the last question essentially concerns the causal efficacy
a Lund University, Sweden.
b Aarhus University, Denmark.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
2
of consciousness and is sometimes framed as the function of consciousness (e.g.
Rosenthal, 2008, 2012). While a consensus on these three questions has so far
eluded the scientific community, we are nevertheless making progress in a closely
related domain: assessing the candidate explanations of consciousness. In recent
years, various efforts have been made to develop ways of comparing candidate ex-
planations of consciousness (e.g. Doerig et al., 2020; Kirkeby-Hinrup & Fazekas,
2021), as well as considering the kinds of evidence necessary to moving forward
debates (Fink, 2016; Kirkeby-Hinrup, 2024; Overgaard & Kirkeby-Hinrup, 2021a).
While these efforts differ in scope and methodology, they share certain features:
a motivation to deliver structure and focus to the debates, meta-considerations of
evidence, and pointing to ways to proceed from here. One initiative to this effect,
proposed by Adrien Doerig and colleagues (Doerig et al., 2020), advocates a range
of criteria an empirical theory of consciousness must satisfy to be viable. Many
of the criteria proposed by Doerig and colleagues pose challenges only to partic-
ular theories. Nevertheless, collecting these criteria into a comprehensive list is a
commendable and (to our minds) necessary effort to establish an overview — and
commence a discussion — of what we expect of a theory of consciousness.
We propose an additional criterion against which to compare theories of
consciousness. The criterion in question concerns the ontogenetic development
of consciousness (O-emergence for brevity). This criterion has been catapulted
into the spotlight by the recent proposal of a theory (The Self-Organizing
Meta-representational Account, or “SOMA”) by Axel Cleeremans and colleagues
(Cleeremans et al., 2020), which takes its point of departure in hypotheses about
the stages involved in the acquisition of consciousness in early childhood. By of-
fering an account of the acquisition of consciousness in ontogenetic development,
SOMA has implicitly (but not explicitly) challenged proponents of competing
theories of consciousness to show how their preferred theory can account for this.
In the couple of years after the publication of SOMA (but seemingly indepen-
dent of SOMA) the prospects of consciousness in early life has received increased
attention. Consequently, several different approaches and a variety of considera-
tions have been offered. These range from how to measure perinatal experience
(Frohlich et al., 2023), the role of co-embodiment in utero in shaping and scaffold-
ing perceptual experience (Ciaunica, Constant, et al., 2021; Ciaunica, Safron, et al.,
2021), as well as considerations about what extant theories of consciousness pre-
dict with respect to fetal consciousness similar to our endeavor here (Mudrik et al.,
2023; Passos-Ferreira, forthcoming).
To preempt misunderstandings, we need to clarify that our usage of emer-
gence pertains to how consciousness emerges in the ontogenetic development of
human beings, i.e. how it emerges in the development of individuals. Thus, our use
of emergence should not be conflated with another widespread use of the word,
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
3
which pertains to the phylogenetic development of consciousness in the human
species (Cabanac et al., 2009) 1.
Returning to O-emergence, the underlying assumption is that there exists a
point in the development of a human individual before which that individual is
not conscious. This assumption, in turn, depends on a widely shared assumption
in cognitive neuroscience, which is that consciousness (at least partly) depends
on brain activity. In other words, most people involved in interdisciplinary con-
sciousness studies think that the brain is necessary for consciousness2, call this the
neural assumption. If one accepts the neural assumption, then the existence of a
before and after the appearance of consciousness follows because in early prena-
tal development, e.g. in the germinal stage (where the entity in question is a zy-
gote consisting of only a few cells) the brain plainly has not physically formed yet.
While the germinal stage serves to establish a clear cutoff before which (according
to the ground assumption) there can be no consciousness because there is no brain,
few believe that the consciousness emerges immediately with the start of brain de-
velopment in the embryonic stage. Rather, the majority (but in no way universal)
consensus in the field appears to be that certain features (e.g. processes, areas, or
connections) of the brain are necessary for consciousness, and that these features
mostly are not present until in later stages of prenatal development, or possibly
early years of childhood. Thus, there is significant theoretical wiggle room with
respect to hypotheses about O-emergence.
Answering the question of when consciousness emerges in human individuals
invites the further question of how consciousness emerges at that point in the
ontogenetic development. In other words, if a theory suggests that consciousness
emerges around the age 85, we next want to know what normally happens in
individuals (or their brains) around the age of 85, that makes plausible the claim
that this is when consciousness emerges. Thus, addressing O-emergence consists
in answering the when and how of the emergence of consciousness in ontogenetic
development.
1 Importantly, we do not claim that the evolutionary origins (phylogeny) of human consciousness
is of no relevance to questions of O-emergence and vice versa. However, the assessment of
theories based on O-emergence we propose can be done in a vacuum, as it were.
2 It is worth noting that the three theories discussed here, as well the ‘prominent ones’ mentioned
in clarification four below, all belong to what is sometimes called ‘neuro-centric’ theories of
consciousness. Roughly speaking, neuro-centric means that a theory holds that a (functioning
neuro-typical) brain is both necessary and sufficient for consciousness. We acknowledge that
this is not only one view in the field, and that a range of theories are on offer that do not think
the brain is sufficient for consciousness, but rather hold that there are non-neural necessary
conditions (e.g. embodiment) that must obtain as well (see, e.g., Ciaunica, Safron, et al., 2021;
Delafield-Butt & Gangopadhyay, 2013; Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2022). Importantly, the O-
emergence challenge pertains also to these theories. However, qua their nature, the explanation
they provide will not exclusively be cached in neural terms. For this reason, it is likely that the
questions used to evaluate O-emergence in relation to non-neuro-centric theories may require
different formulations. We thank an anonymous reviewer for prompting this clarification.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
4
In section three, we propose using three questions to analyze and assess how
a theory accounts for O-emergence. After this, we proceed to evaluate SOMA, the
Global Neuronal Workspace theory (GNW) (Dehaene & Naccache, 2001), and the
REFCON framework (Mogensen & Overgaard, 2018a) using the three questions.
However, to cast this paper and the assessment of the three theories in the right
light, in the next section, we start by laying out some clarifications.
2
Clarifications
Firstly, some theories might argue that O-emergence is a graded process, where
consciousness slowly emerges over time. In those cases, how do we pinpoint the
emergence of consciousness? Now, if one accepts the following premises 1) the
brain is necessary for consciousness, 2) at the germinal stage there is no brain, and
therefore can be no consciousness, 3) neurotypical adult humans are conscious,
and 4) that time (at the level of description of individuals) is unidirectional, one
is committed to there being a before and an after, i.e. that there is a point in time
of ontogenetic emergence. In other words, one is committed to the graded pro-
cess having a beginning. The place on the timeline to affix ontogenetic emergence
would then be at exactly the point where the graded process begins, i.e. at the first
point in time at which there is something it is like for (Nagel, 1974) the individual
in question. Or put more colloquially, the first point in time where a hypothetical
phenomenal consciousness meter reads above zero. In fact, one way to understand
the definition of ontogenetic emergence is exactly this, namely the first transition
from a point in time where the individual has no (phenomenally) consciousness
experiences to a point in time where the individual has (phenomenally) conscious
experiences. Or using the subjectively accessible marker of consciousness pro-
posed by Nagel, the first transition from a point in time where there is nothing it
is like for an individual to a point in time where there is something it is like for an
individual.
In light of this, it is hard to see a non question begging argument for why we
should not place O-emergence at this point in time. The reasoning goes like this:
claiming that O-emergence should not be located at the beginning of the graded
process entails that one holds that the early stages of the graded process should be
excluded for one reason or another. For instance, one might claim that early stages
of the graded process are a special kind of proto-conscious states that do not entail
that there is something it is like to be the individual and that ‘real’ phenomenally
conscious states only occur at a later point in the graded process, and this is reason
to not pinpoint O-emergence to the beginning of the graded process. The reply to
this argument is straightforward and consists simply in pointing out that the first
transition from a point in time where the individual is in no conscious states to
a point in time where the individual is in a proto-conscious state, according to
the definition deployed in the argument, does not coincide with the transition be-
tween the first point in time where the individual is in no phenomenally conscious
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
5
state to a point in time where the individual is in a phenomenally conscious state.
In other words, the important thing is that if there is nothing it is like to be in
the proto-conscious states, then for the purposes of determining the point of O-
emergence what counts is exactly that there is nothing it is like to be in them, i.e.,
that they are not phenomenally conscious states. The first transition from a point
in time where the individual is in no conscious states to a point in time where the
individual is in a proto-conscious state is irrelevant to determining O-emergence.
In relation to O-emergence it is of no consequence whether at the temporally prior
point the individual is in no conscious states at all, or if the individual has some
proto-conscious states. That the proto-conscious states may be causally relevant
to O-emergence also is of no consequence here because causal relevance is not a
relevant property for determining O-emergence. The relevant property is whether
the individual is phenomenally conscious, i.e. whether there is something it is like
to be the individual, or not. In sum, arguing that there is a graded process, and
that O-emergence occurs somewhere after the beginning of that process is tanta-
mount to simply moving the starting point of the relevant graded process to a later
point in time. Anything else seemingly entails working with another definition of
O-emergence than the one committed to when accepting the four premises. Thus,
invoking a graded process does not warrant dismissing the O-emergence criterion.
The second clarification concerns cases where one posits intermittent times-
pans of consciousness separated by periods of unconsciousness in the early stages
of ontogenetic development. To illustrate this idea, suppose the fetus has brief
bursts of conscious experience in the womb between which it returns to being a
fully unconscious individual for extended periods of time (e.g. a week or a month).
The crux is the supposition that these brief bursts of conscious experiences are not
equivalent to the pervasive phenomenon that consciousness is for adult human be-
ings but are instead stages in — or precursors to — the ontogenetic development of
“persistent consciousness”, as it were. The question now is: in cases where inter-
mittent bursts of conscious experience precede a fully-fledged conscious mental
life, where do we place the point of O-emergence? The answer to this question
follows the same lines as the one given above when the question concerned a
graded process. Because O-emergence is defined as the first transition between
a point in time before which there has been nothing it is like to be that individ-
ual, and a point in time where — for the first time — there is something it is like
to be that individual, O-emergence belongs at the starting point of the first burst
of conscious experience. The reasoning for this mirrors the one given above. To
reiterate, the proponent of intermittent bursts of consciousness needs to deliver a
separate argument for why O-emergence should not coincide with the first burst
of consciousness. However, such a separate argument will either beg the question
against the definition of O-emergence or argue that there is nothing it is like for
an individual to undergo these bursts of consciousness, which would render these
bursts irrelevant to O-emergence.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
6
The third clarification is that the analysis we here offer of O-emergence takes
for granted the conceptual framework of the theory under consideration. This
means we are not (at present time) out to criticize theories or leverage objections
to their way of conceiving of neither consciousness nor the processes each the-
ory suggests is underpinning it. Rather, we will investigate theories on their own
terms. In other words, what we aim to do here concerns mapping and projecting.
In cases where a theory has provided answers (or indications) of any facet of O-
emergence, we will faithfully map these while taking for granted the concepts the
theory deploys. Where there are lacunas in the answers, we attempt to project the
likely stance of a theory, again staying faithful and charitable to the conceptual
framework of the theory. This practice should not be taken as an endorsement of
the theories. In fact each author is ambivalent toward at least one theory. Neither
should it be taken as an indication that we do not think there are good objections
to some theories’ conceptual frameworks, conceptions of the explanandum (con-
sciousness), or their respective accounts of O-emergence. The critical point is that
before one can rightfully criticize a theory, it is imperative to understand the ac-
tual claims of the theory, as they are espoused by its proponents. Thus, the present
paper is about setting the foundation on which to have a debate (that may involve
criticism) about O-emergence. The aim is understanding what theories claim (or
are likely to claim) and examining upshots of these claims without problematizing
or objecting to them.
The fourth clarification concerns the selection of theories treated here. Im-
portantly, every candidate explanation of consciousness needs to be able to ac-
count for O-emergence, and therefore should be subjected to the kind of evaluation
we here apply to SOMA, GNW and REFCON3. Therefore, while we only discuss
three theories in this text, we want to underscore that the remaining prominent
hypotheses of consciousness, such as — among others — the Local Recurrency The-
ory, Higher-Order Thought Theory, and Information Integration Theory (see e.g.
Lamme, 2004; Lau & Rosenthal, 2011; Tononi, 2005 respectively) should undergo a
similar process of mapping and projecting4.
3 Recently, Ciaunica et al. (2021) have made important progress in this regard. Furthermore, it is
worth noting that the domain of non-neuro-centric theories in general seem to be ahead of its
neuro-centric counterpart with respect to discussing O-emergence.
4 Two objections have been leveraged to the selection of theories we consider here. The first
objection holds that we should focus on the most prominent theories, and that the SOMA and
REF framework do not fall into this category. The second objection is that the three theories
treated here are too dissimilar and treating them as the same kind of theory is counterproductive.
Let us address each of these objections in turn.
Our reply to the first objection is that it perpetuates a kind of socio-scientific celebrity bias.
To elaborate, one reason (among others) the prominent theories — e.g. Integrated information
theory (Albantakis, 2020), higher-order thought theory (Brown et al., 2019), recurrent processing
theory (Block, 2007) — are prominent is that many researchers are interested in them and pub-
lish about them (in fact, this is roughly what prominent means). We therefore consider it likely
that these theories will be discussed in relation to O-emergence even if they are not included
here (something that is less likely to be the case with SOMA and REFCON). This assumption
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
7
The fifth clarification concerns the core of the subject matter, namely con-
sciousness. To avoid misunderstandings, it is necessary to be clear about how we
conceive of the phenomenon in the present context. The initial answer is simple:
the conception of consciousness that we operate with in treating a given theory is
inherited from the theory. Doing this is part of our endeavor to charitably assess
the theories granting their conceptual frameworks. Critically, one may now point
out that the three theories considered here do not conceive of consciousness in the
same way, so we are comparing apples with oranges. Put differently, one might
object that evaluating their stances on O-emergence would be inherently flawed
is supported by the fact that it is significantly easier to publish discussions of the prominent
theories for the simple reason that they are prominent, and therefore assumed to have a wider
readership and therefore be more attractive to journals. However, the upshot of this is that it
is comparatively more difficult to publish about the non-prominent theories (the fact that this
objection is discussed is partly proof of this). Thus, prominence seems to be self-perpetuating.
Relatedly, the fact that the prominent theories have larger bodies of empirical support is a nat-
ural consequence of the additional attention these theories have enjoyed, under the assumption
that increased attention means more research is being done (i.e. attention correlates with time
and money). More importantly, given that no-one yet knows what the case with human con-
sciousness (and its relation to the brain) is, one should be careful not to conflate popularity with
truth or plausibility. In sum, we are confident that our selection of theories in this text is of
no grave concern, since — given their popularity — the prominent theories are likely to be dis-
cussed in relation to O-emergence eventually. The main aim of this paper exactly is to provide
the foundation for such future discussion.
Turning to the second objection that the three theories to be considered here are too dissim-
ilar to be subjected to the same criteria, we submit that this is a feature, not a bug. We readily
concede that GNW, SOMA and REFCON are indeed dissimilar in several and significant ways.
GNW as the reader likely will know, is a widely discussed theory subjected to several decades
of empirical work, and with a theoretical foundation stretching back to the work of Barnard
Baars in the late eighties. SOMA by contrast is one of the newest additions in the field of inter-
disciplinary consciousness studies, with a comparatively miniscule body of work. Furthermore,
some may see the SOMA as more of a programmatic approach than an actual theory. While we
disagree with this characterization, it is of no consequence here for the reasons given below. Fi-
nally, REFCON is a theory that grew out of an attempt to solve an entirely different problem and
its body of work pertaining to consciousness, while larger than that of SOMA, is still limited. Fi-
nally, GNW has a few papers with neurological considerations pertinent to O-emergence, SOMA
presents a theoretical framework mapping hypothesized stages in the acquisition of conscious-
ness, and REFCON has neither. So, having conceded that these theories are indeed different
both in scope, focus, approach, and size of their bodies of work, what merits subjecting them
to assessment using a single set of criteria? The answer is twofold. Firstly, despite their differ-
ences, all three theories are about consciousness. Secondly, their dissimilarities are exactly the
reason they were chosen. The different foci and level of development (both in general and with
respect to O-emergence) of GNW, SOMA and REFCON will serve to illustrate how assessing
O-emergence can shed light on overlooked implications, offer new perspectives, and point to
future avenues of research. Since we are attempting to set the framework for discussions of
O-emergence, selecting significantly different theories here doubles as a proof of concept for an
O-emergence research program by showing it is applicable to many different kinds of theories
of consciousness. Furthermore, its applicability to theories with different scopes or foci is useful,
not only for assessing and comparing theories across the field, but additionally for raising new
questions and illuminating strengths or shortcomings in relation to each theory.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
8
exactly because the phenomenon they each hold to O-emerge is not the same (this
objection is a variation on the ones discussed above concerning dissimilarities be-
tween the theories). This is not an unreasonable objection, but it misconceives
what is the focus of our treatment here. To elaborate, most theories in the field
agree that there is something it is like to be conscious, and this is the focus when
considering O-emergence. Indeed, referring to Nagel’s way of capturing the phe-
nomenon is prevalent in the literature (for just some recent examples see e.g. Blum
& Blum, 2022; Frohlich et al., 2021; Northoff & Lamme, 2020; Raccah et al., 2021;
Seth & Bayne, 2022). However, what exactly what-it-is-likeness entails is a mat-
ter of extensive debate. For instance, there is extensive and ongoing discussion
about whether conscious perception is rich or sparse (Block, 2011a, 2014; Knotts
et al., 2019; Kouider et al., 2010), or whether there are levels or degrees of con-
sciousness (Barra et al., 2020; Bayne et al., 2016; Overgaard & Overgaard, 2010).
In fact, part of the allure of a possible future determination of which theory of
consciousness accurately captures the phenomenon likely is that it helps us pin
down the extension of the phenomenon i.e., informs us about its nature. In this
light, determining which theory of consciousness is right5 contributes to defining
the phenomenon. Returning to the objection, what we are interested in here is
theories about how and when things emerge, whether the thing is an apple, or an
orange is of less importance. Put differently, we are interested in the emergence
of “fruit”, and even if one theory holds that the fruit that emerges is apples, while
another posits oranges, both are theories about fruit. So — to re-iterate — we are
interested in the first point in ontogenetic development where there is something
it is like to be the individual and we readily concede that what extant theories
take something-it-is-likeness to entail differs significantly (see e.g. Block, 2011b;
Rosenthal, 2011; Weisberg, 2011 for a clearcut example of this). Irrespective of the
extension and importance imbued on what-it-is-likeness by a given theory, as long
as the theory endorses the ground assumption, the theory needs to account for O-
emergence. In the present context, this clarification serves to highlight that it is
possible to map and project a theory’s stance on O-emergence independently of
the specific conception of consciousness and what-it-is-likeness advanced by the
theory’s proponents.
The sixth clarification pertains to the role of O-emergence in the project of as-
sessing and comparing theories of consciousness and the general work on the hard
problem of consciousness (Chalmers, 1995). We see at least two ways in which
mapping and projecting of where theories stand on O-emergence may contribute
in this context. The first is that mapping what each theory of consciousness posits
with respect to O-emergence affords us a set of timepoints which we can than pro-
5 This phrasing is colloquial in the sense that it ignores the significant discussion in the philoso-
phy of science about issues such as whether theories can be proven, the problem of induction,
falsification and so forth. The point we want to make stands even if only something weaker than
“proof” or “truth” is possible.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
9
ceed to investigate empirically6. The results of these investigations — in turn — will
be part of the empirical evidence counting for or against a theory. More broadly,
the mapping of theories gives us places (times) to look for O-emergence, which
may be of benefit to the work on the hard problem by allowing us to approach it
from a new angle i.e., by focusing on the (ontogenetic) origin of the phenomenon
to be explained. The second way considering O-emergence may be of value to
the project of assessing and comparing theories of consciousness is simply my il-
luminating which theories actually have proposed accounts of O-emergence, and
which have not. On the assumption that one thinks an adequate theory of con-
sciousness should explain O-emergence, whether a theory has an account of this
— and the detail of any such account — is a relevant parameter when assessing and
comparing theories.
3
Three questions of O-emergence
In addition to the clarifications offered above, we take for granted that the theories
to be evaluated in light of O-emergence are at least7 those who endorse the ground
assumption, i.e. who believe that the brain is necessary for consciousness. With
this in the background we next present three questions relevant to analyzing a
theory’s account of O-emergence.
3.1
Question 1: Conceptual clarity
The first question is how well defined the theory’s position on O-emergence is on
conceptual grounds. With “well defined” we here mean the amount of specificity
and clarity there is to a theory’s conceptual framework underpinning its expla-
nation of O-emergence. For most theories, conceptual clarity on O-emergence is
proportional to the conceptual clarity already present in the general conceptual
framework of the theory. To illustrate, on the higher-order theories an individual
6 Given the current lack of unequivocal biomarkers of consciousness (and especially ones that
can be detected in utero provided the associated ethical and methodological constraints) this en-
deavor is currently not feasible. However, it would be imprudent to assume that such biomarkers
will never be found, and recent progress has been made in this domain (Frohlich et al., 2023). In
one sense, O-emergence may constitute the ideal scenario for a contrastive study of conscious-
ness.
7 Plausibly, any theory positing that consciousness exists has some variant of O-emergence ques-
tion to answer. For instance, dualistic theories can provide adequate answers, even if they may
amount to: ‘consciousness never emerges, it was always there because the soul grounds con-
sciousness, and the soul is eternal’. Even some theories that deny the existence of consciousness
need to answer questions in the vein of O-emergence, either about linguistic practices, or about
the origin and nature of any illusions we may have about consciousness (see e.g. Chalmers, 2018).
Similarly, panpsychist theories in their answer to the so-called combination problem (Coleman,
2014; Goff, 2009) would need to tell us when in ontogenetic development micro-conscious or
proto-conscious elements combine in the requisite way to form the distinctive human conscious-
ness. See also footnote 2.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
10
is in a conscious state X if the individual has a higher-order representation of X
(Rosenthal, 2012). From this, it can be taken to follow that O-emergence occurs
when a higher-order state of the requisite kind occurs for the first time during
ontogenetic development. Importantly, while conceptual clarity on O-emergence
can often be derived in this way, it is not the case necessarily, and there may be
significant variations depending on the particular wording of a theory. For in-
stance, between Rosenthal’s actualist HOT theory and the wide intrinsicality view
of Rocco Gennaro (Gennaro, 2016).
3.2
Question 2: Empirical clarity
This question concerns the amount of clarity a theory delivers regarding O-
emergence in the empirical domain, i.e. in terms of events in the brain (c.f. the
ground assumption). We can subdivide empirical clarity into two aspects. First, to-
pographical aspects, i.e. whether the explanation offered for O-emergence invokes
specific brain areas. Secondly, whether it invokes various kinds of neural features,
such as potentiation, plasticity, memory stores, neurotransmitters, connectivity,
to name a few.
To assess empirical clarity is to consider in conjunction the
topographical claims and the feature claims of a theory. At issue is whether the
conjunction sufficiently illuminates the posited transition from an unconscious
individual to a conscious one. Now, clearly, clarity in the empirical domain is a
tall order for all theories8, and presently no theories give an (non-contentious)
exhaustive answer. However, the fact that the question is really hard does not
entail that we cannot evaluate and compare the quality of the answers offered by
the various theories of consciousness.
3.3
Question 3: Physical, structural, and functional
The third question concerns the kind of changes in the brain that are sufficient
for O-emergence. There seems to be three possible kinds of changes a theory can
espouse: physical, structural, and functional. Holding that the operative factor un-
derpinning O-emergence is physical consists in the view that certain brain areas
X are sufficient for O-emergence, and once X are fully developed O-emergence oc-
curs. Embracing the structural position consists in the view that specific structural
properties are sufficient for O-emergence. One obvious candidate for such struc-
tural features could be the development of specific neural pathways, properties of
such pathways (e.g. overall connectivity), or sets of pathways constituting connec-
tion hubs. Finally, the functional position consists in the view that the develop-
ment of certain functional capacities is sufficient for O-emergence. An example
of a candidate for a functional feature of this kind could be internal monitoring.
Crudely put, one might say that the physical position concerns the development
8 One obvious reason for this is that the question of O-emergence in relation to brain function has
a close affinity to the notorious hard problem of consciousness.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
11
of brain areas, the structural position concerns relations between them, and the
functional position concerns what brain areas (or sets of them) do.
3.4
Conclusions about O-emergence in development
It is not always obvious from a merely neural description of events what the impli-
cations of said events are at the level of personhood, and being clear about what
a given theory entails with respect to when a human can be assumed to be con-
scious may have significant implications in a range of other domains (e.g. ethics;
see Overgaard & Kirkeby-Hinrup, 2021b). For this reason, we will conclude the
treatment of each theory by synthesizing and summing up the answers provided
to the three questions. In doing this, we pay special attention to the consequences
of its view on the (neurotypical) ontogenetic development of consciousness. Is
the baby conscious prenatally? Is it conscious at the age 3 months? 6 months? 1
year? Or later? It is here important to reiterate that what the question concerns
is the earliest point at which phenomenal experiences occur. As we explained in the
introduction there has to be a before and an after.
4
SOMA and O-emergence
Since the proponents of SOMA highlight explicitly the importance of addressing
O-emergence, SOMA is a suitable candidate to be the first theory to be evaluated
using the three questions presented in the previous section. Because the proposal
of SOMA is so recent (in terms of academic publishing time), there is — as of yet —
not much literature on it. However, the original article along with the immediately
following discussion nevertheless contain substantial claims and are sufficient to
(preliminarily) assess SOMA in light of O-emergence. Certainly, given that the
hypothesis is in its infancy, there is room for development and refinement which
will allow its proponents to further flesh out the claims and implications of SOMA
with respect to O-emergence. Ideally, any shortcomings or outstanding questions
remaining after the treatment in this paper will serve to spur further refinement
and development of the theory. With this caveat in mind, we now turn to assessing
how SOMA handles O-emergence. Initially, it is worth noting that Cleeremans et
al. explicitly (Cleeremans et al., 2020, p. 114) frame the development of SOMA in
light of what we call O-emergence (as also revealed by the title “Learning to be con-
scious”). Their paper is explicit in the relevance and importance of what we call the
ontogenetic emergence challenge, i.e. that a central (but often overlooked) ques-
tion concerns the changes in the brain through development that initially brings
about consciousness.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
12
4.1
Question 1: Conceptual clarity
The central claim of SOMA is that the emergence of consciousness depends on
learning (Cleeremans et al., 2020. 115). The way SOMA deploys learning to explain
the acquisition of consciousness depends on a set of interconnected claims. A core
claim is that consciousness emerges as result of the development of a second-order
system that observes and learns about the representations and dynamics of the
network of first-order states the individual is in. In the words of Cleeremans et al.
(Cleeremans et al., 2020, p. 117) this second-order system “subtends phenomenal
experiences”.
Another critical component of SOMA’s explanation of O-emergence is the so-
called self-other loop. The self-other loop consists in observations and interactions
with others, and through these a model of agenthood is developed. This model is
constructed from smaller models of unobservable internal states inferred in – or
attributed to - other agents, by extrapolation from the knowledge the individual
has of her own states. The main process driving the inference and attribution of
unobservable inner states in other agents is the predictive processing involved in
the perception-action loop (that precedes the self-other loop in ontogenetic devel-
opment). Upon the development of a model of agenthood, this model is available
for application to the individual herself. It is the application of models of agent-
hood to oneself that results in the emergence of a self and phenomenal experience
(Cleeremans et al., 2020, p. 120). Thus, with respect to conceptual clarity, SOMA
provides an internally consistent and very detailed account of the different stages
in the process resulting in O-emergence.
4.2
Question 2: Empirical clarity
When it comes to empirical clarity, SOMA suggests a range of mechanisms and
capacities that drive the acquisition of models of agenthood and handle the attri-
bution of these to the individual herself, resulting in the individual learning to
be conscious. The core mechanism underpinning the whole process is plasticity,
i.e. the brain’s ability to change and adapt dynamically over time. Thus, it is plastic-
ity that bootstraps the implementation of the three loops central to SOMA. Briefly,
in the first stage (the inner loop), the brain engages in self-monitoring to gather in-
formation about — and keep track of — which states it is in. Through informational
integration processes, this results in a kind of (unconscious) metacognition, what
Cleeremans and colleagues call a ‘higher-order network’ engaged in representa-
tional re-description of the first-order states (e.g. Cleeremans et al., 2020, p. 118
fig. 1). Through the deployment of predictive coding mechanisms, the individual
next (in the perception-action loop) correlates execution of actions with percep-
tual input. Finally, (in the self-other loop) the individual deploys theory of mind
capacities (that plausibly deploy knowledge acquired by the individual about her-
self via the inner-loop and the perception-action loop) to infer inner unobservable
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
13
states in other individuals, yielding the models of agenthood which can then be
applied to herself, resulting in the acquisition of consciousness.
To summarize, the features invoked by SOMA in their explanation of
O-emergence are plasticity, self-monitoring, metacognition, theory of mind,
information integration, generative models, recurrent activity, and predictive
coding. Each of these features are fairly well understood both theoretically and
empirically, with the caveat that most are also the subject of significant debate.
If we turn our attention to the topographical aspect of empirical clarity, SOMA
is less specific. In line with its reliance on ideas from global workspace, SOMA
suggests that brain function cascades across the brain (Cleeremans et al., 2020, p.
114). In line with its affinity with the higher-order thought theories, proponents
of SOMA consider the prefrontal cortex important, but remain somewhat noncom-
mittal (Cleeremans et al., 2020, p. 117). They highlight the importance of the PFC
in handling metacognition, monitoring and control, but nevertheless suggest that
the models relevant to consciousness may be instantiated anywhere in the brain
(Cleeremans et al., 2020, p. 118). One might try to determine the most likely to-
pographical instantiation based on the close relationship to higher-order thought
theories, global workspace (that both have advanced specific topographical areas
or structures as relevant to their theory (e.g. Lau & Rosenthal, 2011; Mashour
et al., 2020) posited by proponents of SOMA. One might also try to extrapolate
topography based on the features suggested in SOMA to be involved in acquir-
ing consciousness. For instance, both theory of mind (e.g. Frith & Frith, 2006;
Gallagher & Frith, 2003) and metacognition (e.g. Fleming & Dolan, 2012) have
generally been associated with specific topographical areas. Nevertheless, until
further details are published by proponents of SOMA the topographical aspect of
empirical clarity remains underspecified.
4.3
Question 3: Physical, structural, or functional
SOMA posits as the stimulus condition for O-emergence changes of the functional
kind, i.e. something the brain becomes able to do. To illustrate this, one can point
to the proponents of SOMA suggesting that (Cleeremans et al., 2020, p. 120): “some-
thing unique happens when a developing agent has models of itself available to it”
(italics added) and later “something special happens when we try to build a model
of the internal, unobservable states of agents that are just like ourselves” (Cleere-
mans et al., 2020, p. 121, italics added).9
9 Some might think it is worth asking what exactly these quotes mean, and how they are supposed
to explain the emergence of consciousness. Why should the brain learning to 1) re-describe its
own representations to itself 2) predict the consequences of its actions on the world and 3) to re-
describe its own activity to itself based on an (implicit, unconscious, enactive, embodied) internal
model of agenthood derived from observation of other agents, yield a very special and unique
type of knowledge or process that – when achieved – makes qualia appear and be continuously
present in that individual from that moment on? However, questions of this kind apply to every
theory, given that they tacitly invoke the famous explanatory gap (Levine, 1983). Thus, one might
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
14
4.4
Conclusions about O-emergence in development
SOMA is not clearly committed to a point in development for O-emergence. Cleere-
mans et al. (2020, p. 120) suggest that the acquisition of consciousness, and the
development of a self, emerge progressively through an ongoing process. It is un-
clear if this suggestion amounts to the kind of graded process discussed above. In
any case, it is possible to extrapolate possible implications regarding O-emergence
from their current body of work. For instance, one might argue (as some have
done; e.g. Overgaard & Kirkeby-Hinrup, 2021b) that the fact that the self-other
loop relies on theory of mind processes seemingly entails that O-emergence can-
not take place before the cognitive machinery catering to theory of mind has been
developed. Furthermore, since there is evidence that fully fledged theory of mind
does not develop until the age of 3 or 4 years, this suggests that an upshot of
SOMA is that children below that age cannot be said to be phenomenally con-
scious. However, proponents of SOMA appear to reject this, albeit without giving
an alternative answer (Cleeremans et al., 2021).
5
REFCON and O-emergence
REFCON is a theory of consciousness originating from the general neurocognitive
theory with the moniker Reorganization of Elementary Functions (REF)10. REF was
created to account for two seemingly contradictive phenomena. On the one hand,
functional localization in neurotypical individuals and functional recovery after
focal acquired brain injury on the other.
The REF model can roughly be described as a connectionist network within
which the “units” are advanced processing modules called Elementary Functions
(EFs)11. According to the REF model, all behavioral and/or mental phenomena are
surface phenomena. This includes e.g. task solution, thoughts, and consciousness.
The neural substrate of a given EF is localized within a restricted subdivision of
a neural structure. Every EF performs fixed information processing on whatever
input it is given and provides an output for further processing. Importantly, the
information processing performed by individual EFs cannot be characterized ac-
cording to traditional “functional/cognitive” terms. Rather, it can best be described
just as well ask how and why recurrent processing, higher-order representation, or integration of
information could give rise to conscious experience. We certainly agree that such questions are
important to ask. Nevertheless, given that the present objective is an explorative investigation
of SOMA’s account of O-emergence, these questions are not of relevance here, and will be left
to others to address (Schurger & Graziano, 2022).
10 Given its complexity, we cannot here provide a fully detailed introduction to the REF framework.
Thus, we will limit ourselves to introducing the features relevant to assessing the questions of
O-emergence and urge readers to consult the comprehensive literature available (Mogensen et
al., 2018; Mogensen & Overgaard, 2018a, 2018b).
11 This is in sharp contrast to traditional connectionist networks within which the “unit” is a “func-
tionally indifferent” neuron.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
15
in mathematical terms. A given EF will typically simultaneously be involved in
information processing associated with several traditional cognitive domains. Ev-
ery structure/substructure of the brain (e.g. the hippocampus) mediates hundreds
or thousands of unique EFs. According to the REF model, the “bridge” between
the strictly localized and low-level information processing EFs and the surface
phenomena (e.g. problem solving and/or mental phenomena) are the Algorithmic
Strategies (ASs). ASs consist of numerous interacting EFs and are distributed in the
sense that the neural substrate of an AS includes both the neural substrate of the in-
dividual EFs and the neural connections mediating the interactions between these
EFs (Mogensen et al., 2018). Given the distributed nature of EFs, this means that
typically, an AS will include EFs spanning numerous parts of the brain. Because
an AS is the neurocognitive mechanism mediating a given surface phenomenon,
this implies that the neural underpinnings of the surface phenomena are likewise
distributed.
The original REF model primarily focused on the mechanisms of problem
solving as well as basic neurocognitive processes.
To account for perceptual
processes (including conscious perception) REF was expanded with the REFCON
model (Overgaard & Mogensen, 2014, 2015). The REFCON model is based on
the same units and dynamic principles as the original REF model but introduces
several new entities and concepts. The two most essential components are the
Perceptual Algorithmic Modules (PAMs) and the Situational Algorithmic Strategy
(SAS). Briefly: PAMs represent the external entities being perceived and are
hierarchically ordered. The lower-level PAMs represent features rather than ob-
jects, while PAMs at progressively higher levels represent more complex entities
and eventually individual objects. PAMs are selected in a “mutual competition”
process – and the process of perceiving consists in the selection of PAMs of
constantly higher levels.
Fully identifying what is perceived is the selection
of a PAM of the highest level. Importantly, PAMs (even those of the highest
level) cannot in themselves mediate mental phenomena – including perceptual
awareness. The way they contribute to surface phenomena is by integration into
the SAS, making them available for consciousness and/or action.
The SAS is a highly specialized, dynamic network reflecting the current state
of the individual. Thus, the SAS (which is distributed across practically all of the
brain – including EFs from virtually all brain structures) represents not only the
current perceptual situation but also the general internal – including mental – sta-
tus of the individual. The use of refined methods such as the Perceptual Awareness
Scale (PAS) (Ramsøy & Overgaard, 2004) has demonstrated that consciousness is
best understood as a process that is present in degrees – spanning a number of
intermediate steps from totally absent to totally present (Koch & Preuschoff, 2007;
Overgaard et al., 2006). According to the REFCON model it is the degree of PAM
integration into SAS that determines to what extent a perceptual entity is avail-
able for perceptual awareness. Thus, the perceptual process will – via selection
of PAMs of progressively higher levels and eventual integration into SAS – result
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
16
in a SAS configuration with a more or less integrated PAM of the highest level
representing what is being perceived.
5.1
Question 1: Conceptual clarity
Given that REFCON is originally conceived to answer a separate question, to get
a handle on what it entails with respect to ontogenetic emergence, one needs to
extrapolate from the fact that REFCON links consciousness to information that
is available for action, in the form of algorithmic modules (AMs). While the ex-
act type of action in question is still considered unknown (personal communica-
tion), the current hypothesis is that it is probably a special kind of flexible action.
Furthermore, given that REFCON envisions mental phenomena such as thought
and action as surface phenomena mediated by the SAS, REFCON indicates that
O-emergence may be connected to the first appearance of these. We should not
be surprised that REFCON does not deliver very detailed conceptual clarification
of the processes involved in the ontogenetic acquisition of consciousness for three
reasons. First, the theory was originally conceived to address a separate problem.
Secondly, the central explanatory posits deployed in REFCON are mathematical,
as opposed to conceptual. And finally, the questions of O-emergence as criteria
for theories are only first presented in this paper and are therefore only now avail-
able as guidance for future development of the REFCON model. So, while we are
unable to reach a conclusion on the conceptual clarity question for REFCON, we
have nevertheless set a foundation and provided a frame for the debate on this.
5.2
Question 2: Empirical clarity
REFCON does not specify any single brain area related to consciousness since both
the EFs, AMs and the SAS are distributed across the whole brain. Furthermore, be-
cause the REF framework allows for flexible reorganization, if REFCON eventually
comes to associate a particular type of neural mechanism with integration into the
SAS, this will likely merely reflect the neurotypical mechanism but not the only way
integration into the SAS may be instantiated (personal communication). While REF-
CON — for the reasons just given — is underspecified in terms of localization, there
are two other parameters on which REFCON shows empirical promise in relation
to O-emergence. First of all, because the elements in REFCON are mathematical,
the model has the potential to very precisely determine O-emergence at some point
in the future, both in neurotypical development and on an individual level. How-
ever, the exact mathematics remain unspecified. Secondly, REFCON gives rise to a
series of experimental predictions, which are useful to evaluate O-emergence. For
instance, one prediction is that consciousness is graded rather than dichotomous,
and that the gradedness correlates with performance.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
17
5.3
Question 3: Physical, structural, or functional
REFCON clearly advances a functional answer as consciousness is associated with
information being integrated in SAS – independent of any physical structure. RE-
FCON leaves room for the possibility that it may be the case that certain brain
processes are necessary for consciousness, but this would be considered an em-
pirical fact. Nothing in the REFCON theory requires that there is any physical
structure that has a role of being necessary for consciousness.
5.4
Conclusions about O-emergence in development
REFCON does not specify one specific moment during the ontogenetic develop-
ment where consciousness arises.
Due to the resistance to associate any spe-
cific neural organization or structure with consciousness, an investigation into the
physical development may be inconsequential. REFCON relates consciousness to
information available for action – in particular flexible action. This aspect is under-
defined in the theory, as it considers it a topic to be answered by future research
exactly what may characterize such actions (personal communication). The idea is
based on the simple observation that all things we are conscious of, we are able to
speak about or act on – whether this be in a very simple sense or with full insight
into the object or the action. Returning to O-emergence, it is possible to tenta-
tively extrapolate an answer from REFCON. The extrapolation goes like this: the
earliest movements are observed in the fetus around week 7, the neuromuscular
junction is observed already in week 9, and at week 12, the peripheral nerves in
the fetus have reached their muscle targets (Hayat & Rutherford, 2018). The neural
infrastructure for sensory and proprioceptive feedback appears relatively early in
gestation; classical experiments in postmortem fetal tissue demonstrated reflexive
responses to tactile cutaneous stimulation very early in development (Hakamada
et al., 1988). These findings complete the neural circuit from the cortex to the
effector organs of movement at a relatively early stage of in utero development,
which allows for spontaneous motor behavior to manifest. Although it is difficult
for REFCON to commit to a specific moment in the ontogenesis for the appear-
ance of consciousness, the theory tentatively proposes that a fetus between 7 and
12 weeks is conscious, if not even before (personal communication).
6
GNW and O-emergence
Unlike SOMA and REFCON, the Global Workspace theory, along with its younger
sibling the Global Neuronal Workspace theory, has been around for many years.
There has been ample work put into the development of the workspace model, and
this is clearly reflected in how it handles the questions related to O-emergence. Yet,
when it comes to O-emergence specifically, the workspace theories still provide
only a relatively small body of work. Connections between Global Workspace the-
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
18
ory and O-emergence are mentioned in passing occasionally (see e.g. Changeux,
2017; Mashour et al., 2020), but only a few papers are devoted to the topic (Lager-
crantz, 2009; Lagercrantz & Changeux, 2009).
The central idea in the global workspace theory is that consciousness depends
critically on the availability of information. A mental state becomes conscious,
when it is broadcast to a vast array of cognitive consumer systems. In the vernacu-
lar of the Global Neuronal Workspace this process is called ignition and is charac-
terized by sudden non-linear activation profiles initiated in a (predominantly) fron-
toparietal network consisting of distributed and heavily interconnected neurons
with long-range axons (Mashour et al., 2020). Activations in the global workspace
are driven by so-called workspace neurons that selectively mobilize or suppress,
through descending connections, the contribution of specific processor neurons
(e.g. in sensory cortices) depending on task relevance.
6.1
Question 1: Conceptual clarity
In the two papers mentioned above (Lagercrantz, 2009; Lagercrantz & Changeux,
2009) specifically discussing GNW in relation to O-emergence, the authors pro-
vide relatively little conceptual clarification, instead relying on the large body of
work already available on the workspace framework. Given the prominence of
workspace models in debates about consciousness, and consequently the number
of publications over the last couple of decades discussing this, we, like Lagercrantz
and Changeux, will not rehash every aspect of the workspace models here, but
merely note that on the question of conceptual clarity, the GNW is on very solid
ground given that the answer piggybacks on the existing conceptual framework.
In brief, consciousness depends on broadcasting (ignition), and in relation to O-
emergence what matters is when the sufficient conditions for this come about.
6.2
Question 2: Empirical clarity
Things get more interesting when we turn to the second question about the em-
pirical clarity of GNW in relation to O-emergence. This is where the importance
of the contributions of Lagercrantz and Changeux becomes apparent. Lagercrantz
(2009) posits that (neurotypical) newborns are clearly conscious according to all
ten criteria Lagercrantz deploys to assess the presence of consciousness (impor-
tantly, the criteria mentioned here should not be conflated with the ones proposed
by Doerig et al. discussed above. For details on Lagercrantz’s criteria see his 2009,
pp. 57–58). However, the question of whether babies may be conscious prenatally
remains. Lagercrantz and Changeux explore this question indirectly through dis-
cussion of the possibility of consciousness in very preterm babies ex utero. Initially,
in line with the ground assumption discussed in the introduction, a clear cut-off
before which the authors rule out the existence of consciousness can be estab-
lished based on the initial development of the requisite neural structures underpin-
ning the global workspace. Lagercrantz (Lagercrantz, 2009, p. 58) sets this cutoff
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
19
around the 23-24th week of pregnancy referring to the fact that it is only around
this time that the thalamocortical connections are established. In the Changeux
paper (Lagercrantz & Changeux, 2009, p. 259), the authors posit that before the
26th week of pregnancy, the immaturity of the brain networks is such that it is
implausible that they can sustain ‘minimal consciousness’. Since their treatment
is based on preterm babies ex utero, it is unclear whether the authors hold that —
prenatally — babies are entirely unconscious, and that consciousness appears at
birth. One reason this is unclear is that they state that “in utero the fetus is mostly
in a state of unconsciousness” (Lagercrantz & Changeux, 2009, p. 258). In relation
to O-emergence, the presence of the word “mostly” in this quote is of central con-
cern. This is because ‘mostly’ indicates that the fetus in utero may be intermittently
conscious i.e., a case of the kind of intermittent bursts of consciousness discussed
in clarification two of the introduction above. If the fetus in utero is intermittently
conscious then GNW cannot hold that O-emergence coincides with birth. On the
other hand, they seem to suggest a role for birth in O-emergence through suggest-
ing that behavioral signs in utero seem to be preprogrammed and of subcortical
origin, that the fetus is largely sedated and that noxious stimuli cause inhibition
instead of arousal (ibid). Continuing to suggest that arousal incurred by multiple
distinct causes at birth may boot up, as it were, consciousness. This is supposedly
achieved at birth by stress activation of the cholinergic system, the sudden arrival
of a host of new sensory stimuli, and the removal of endogenous constraints on
consciousness (e.g. sedation in the uterus by pregnanolone and prostaglandin). In
any case, we will remain neutral on this ambiguity here and merely note that there
seems to be at least two options for a proponent of GNW. The first option is to af-
fix O-emergence to birth. The second option is to hold that in utero the fetus is
conscious (for at least a single point in time prior to birth). We look forward to a
clarification of this from proponents of GNW.
6.3
Question 3: Physical, structural, or functional
The answer to this question depends on which stance is taken on the role of birth
just discussed. If one takes the position that birth is the key factor, then the
changes relevant to O-emergence are of the physical and are the ones associated
with birth. If one does not think birth is the key factor, then it is unclear what the
relevant changes are. If one thinks the full consolidation of a global workspace at
some point in utero is sufficient, then that would be a reason to give a structural
answer. Importantly, both options share a necessary condition for O-emergence
which is the development of the requisite neural architecture to support the neu-
ronal workspace. This necessary condition is in place around the 24-26th weeks
of pregnancy, which means that regardless of which position one takes on birth,
O-emergence cannot occur before that point.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
20
6.4
Conclusions about O-emergence in development
The answer from Lagercrantz and Changeux seems to be that consciousness
emerges at birth, with the caveat that (as we saw in their answer to the second
question) that preterm babies born before the 24th to 26th weeks are likely to
lack the requisite neural development to sustain consciousness. If one thinks
that birth is the key factor, one interesting implication is that after the 26th week
of pregnancy the fetus seemingly is counterfactually conscious, in the sense
that (ceteris paribus) if it were to be born it would become conscious.
Now,
one might object that for the GNW account what really matters is broadcasting
(ignition) and that birth is irrelevant. We agree that on the theoretical level, this
seems to be the right answer. However, in the discussion of O-emergence, what
we are interested in is the empirical reality, i.e. when consciousness typically
emergences in actual (neurotypical) human development.
This perspective is
also the one taken by Lagercrantz and Changeux, whose work we have relied
on here. So while we acknowledge that there is a theoretical answer, which is
that O-emergence coincides with the first instance of broadcasting, what we are
interested in here is the empirical aspect which is when does the first instance of
broadcasting typically occur. Disregarding the outstanding questions we have
highlighted in relation to the views of Lagercrantz and Changeux, their answer
appears to be that it occurs at birth.
7
Concluding remarks
In the introduction, we applauded the extant efforts to assess and compare theories
of consciousness. The aim of this paper has been to complement these efforts by in-
troducing a new parameter on which to assess theories of consciousness. We took
as a starting point the assumption that consciousness depends on brain activity,
and from this concluded that since the brain does not yet exist at conception, there
has to be a point in ontogenetic development at which consciousness emerges in
an individual. Given that the transition from an in esse unconscious being to a
conscious one can be considered an important turning point in the ontogenetic
development of an individual, we were surprised by the scarcity of treatment on-
togenetic emergence has been given in the debates between competing theories
of consciousness. To remedy this, we proposed three questions to assess where
a given theory stands on O-emergence. Then, we applied these criteria to three
theories of consciousness to assess the extent to which each could account for O-
emergence. This served to provide a foundation and frame for the theoretical side
of a debate on O-emergence. It is worth noting however that on the empirical side
of these questions, recent work (Frohlich et al., 2023) on biophysical markers of
consciousness measurable in utero looks promising.
Finally, a few things are worth underscoring in relation to the investigation
of O-emergence presented here. The first thing is merely a reiteration of the fact
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
21
that O-emergence is — as of yet — an underexplored domain within the debates
on theories of consciousness. An upshot of this is that even theories which ac-
tually have considered O-emergence (e.g. SOMA and GNW) still have significant
outstanding questions, and naturally, theories that have not yet treated questions
of O-emergence (e.g. REFCON) have even more questions to answer in this regard.
Therefore, a significant body of work remains across the field of candidate theories
to develop accounts of O-emergence.
The second thing concerns the context of this investigation. The context is the
overarching project of assessing and comparing theories of consciousness. In this
project O-emergence is but one of several criteria. However, outside of this context,
addressing O-emergence belongs on the to-do list of proponents of any theory of
consciousness that endorse the ground assumption (that consciousness depends on
brain activity). At some point in the transition from an entity with no brain and
therefore no consciousness to a human individual that has a brain and is conscious,
consciousness must appear for the first time. Given that O-emergence follows from
the ground assumption, and moreover concerns the very genesis of phenomenon
that is the central explanandum of theories of consciousness, it may be considered
a feature of the phenomenon that a successful theory ought to account for.
The third thing is the approach we have taken here. Even if there is a large body
of work yet to be done on O-emergence, the tools to take it on are available. We
have offered three questions that can be deployed to evaluate a theory in light of
O-emergence. We have suggested that answers to one or more of these questions
sometimes can be derived from the general theoretical and empirical frameworks
of a theory. This has two important implications. First, theories that have not yet
explicitly treated O-emergence do not need to start from scratch. Secondly, it is
possible to assess where a theory stands on O-emergence even if its proponents
have not addressed this explicitly. Explicit answers from a theory’s proponents (of
course) are preferable to extrapolating answers to questions of O-emergence from
the theory’s general theoretical and empirical frameworks. However, the latter
may serve to scaffold the former by drawing attention to apparent implications
or problems that need to be addressed by a theory in relation to O-emergence.
This may serve to guide and inspire work on O-emergence, thus opening future
avenues of research. Examples of this are available from all three cases we have
treated here. To elaborate, in our analysis of SOMA we highlighted an implica-
tion of SOMAs dependence on theory of mind (ToM). Because ToM is only fully
developed around three to four years of age, this seems to entail that O-emergence
occurs correspondingly late. If something less than fully fledged ToM is sufficient
for O-emergence, interesting questions arise regarding what it is, why it is so, and
how it fits into the rest of the SOMA framework. In our analysis of GNW we identi-
fied a need for elaboration on two aspects. The first concerned the phrase “in utero
the fetus is mostly in a state of unconsciousness” (Lagercrantz & Changeux, 2009, p.
258). Does this mean that the fetus is sometimes conscious in utero? The answer
to this question is important to understanding GNW’s account of O-emergence.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
22
The second aspect in need of elaboration by proponents of GNW concerns how
to understand the seemingly counterfactual ascription of consciousness that fol-
lows from approaching the issue by asking when a fetus would be conscious if it
was born. Our analysis of REFCON illustrates how much can be derived from the
general theoretical and empirical framework of a theory, and how this may guide
future explicit treatment of O-emergence as well as the overall development of a
theory.
References
Albantakis, L. (2020). Integrated information theory. In Beyond neural correlates of consciousness (pp. 87–103). Routledge.
Barra, A., Carrière, M., Laureys, S., & Martial, C. (2020). From unconscious to conscious: A spectrum of states. In Beyond
neural correlates of consciousness (pp. 16–43). Routledge.
Bayne, T., Hohwy, J., & Owen, A. M. (2016). Are there levels of consciousness? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(6), 405–413.
Block, N. (2007). Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh between psychology and neuroscience. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 30(5-6), 481-99; discussion 499-548. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X07002786
Block, N. (2011a). Perceptual consciousness overflows cognitive access. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(12), 567–575. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.11.001
Block, N. (2011b). The higher order approach to consciousness is defunct. Analysis, 71(3), 419–431. https://doi.org/10.1093/
analys/anr037
Block, N. (2014). Rich conscious perception outside focal attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18(9), 445–447.
Blum, L., & Blum, M. (2022). A theory of consciousness from a theoretical computer science perspective: Insights from the
conscious turing machine. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(21), e2115934119. https://doi.org/doi:
10.1073/pnas.2115934119
Brown, R., Lau, H., & LeDoux, J. E. (2019). Understanding the higher-order approach to consciousness. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 23(9), 754–768. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.06.009
Cabanac, M., Cabanac, A. J., & Parent, A. (2009). The emergence of consciousness in phylogeny. Behavioural Brain Research,
198(2), 267–272.
Chalmers, D. J. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2(3), 200–219.
Chalmers, D. J. (2018). The meta-problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 25(9-10), 6–61.
Changeux, J.-P. (2017). Climbing brain levels of organisation from genes to consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
21(3), 168–181.
Ciaunica, A., Constant, A., Preissl, H., & Fotopoulou, K. (2021). The first prior: From co-embodiment to co-homeostasis in
early life. Consciousness and Cognition, 91, 103117. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2021.103117
Ciaunica, A., Safron, A., & Delafield-Butt, J. (2021). Back to square one: The bodily roots of conscious experiences in early
life. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2021(2). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niab037
Cleeremans, A., Achoui, D., Beauny, A., Keuninckx, L., Martin, J.-R., Muñoz-Moldes, S., Vuillaume, L., & De Heering, A.
(2020). Learning to be conscious. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 24(2), 112–123.
Cleeremans, A., Achoui, D., Beauny, A., Keuninckx, L., Martin, J.-R., Muñoz-Moldes, S., Vuillaume, L., & De Heering, A.
(2021). Do you need to be conscious to learn to be conscious? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 25(1), 9–11.
Coleman, S. (2014). The real combination problem: Panpsychism, micro-subjects, and emergence. Erkenntnis, 79(1), 19–44.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10670-013-9431-x
Dehaene, S., & Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness: Basic evidence and a workspace
framework. Cognition, 79(1–2), 1–37. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0277(00)00123-2
Delafield-Butt, J. T., & Gangopadhyay, N. (2013). Sensorimotor intentionality: The origins of intentionality in prospective
agent action. Developmental Review, 33(4), 399–425. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2013.09.001
Delafield-Butt, J., & Trevarthen, C. (2022). Consciousness generates agent action. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 45, e44.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X2100203X
Doerig, A., Schurger, A., & Herzog, M. H. (2020). Hard criteria for empirical theories of consciousness. Cognitive Neuro-
science, 12(2), 41–62.
Fink, S. B. (2016). A deeper look at the “neural correlate of consciousness.” Frontiers in Psychology, 7. https://doi.org/10.338
9/fpsyg.2016.01044
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of consciousness
23
Fleming, S. M., & Dolan, R. J. (2012). The neural basis of metacognitive ability. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences, 367(1594), 1338–1349. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2011.0417
Frith, C. D., & Frith, U. (2006). The neural basis of mentalizing. Neuron, 50(4), 531–534. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2
006.05.001
Frohlich, J., Bayne, T., DallaVecchia, A., Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., Mediano, P. A., Moser, J., Talar, K., Gharabaghi, A., & Preissl,
H. (2023). Not with a “zap” but with a “beep”: Measuring the origins of perinatal experience. Neuroimage, 120057.
Frohlich, J., Toker, D., & Monti, M. M. (2021). Consciousness among delta waves: A paradox? Brain, 144(8), 2257–2277.
Gallagher, H. L., & Frith, C. D. (2003). Functional imaging of “theory of mind.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(2), 77–83.
Gennaro, R. J. (2016). Higher-order thoughts, neural realization, and the metaphysics of consciousness. In Consciousness:
Integrating eastern and western perspectives (pp. 83–102). New Age Publishers.
Goff, P. (2009). Why panpsychism doesn’t help us explain consciousness. Dialectica, 63(3), 289–311.
Hakamada, S., Hayakawa, F., Kuno, K., & Tanaka, R. (1988). Development of the monosynaptic reflex pathway in the human
spinal cord. Developmental Brain Research, 42(2), 239–246.
Hayat, T. T., & Rutherford, M. A. (2018). Neuroimaging perspectives on fetal motor behavior. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 92, 390–401.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A. (2024). Interdisciplinary consciousness studies needs philosophers of science. Filosofiska Notiser, 11(1),
3–18.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Fazekas, P. (2021). Consciousness and inference to the best explanation: Compiling empirical ev-
idence supporting the access-phenomenal distinction and the overflow hypothesis. Consciousness and Cognition, 94,
103173.
Knotts, J., Odegaard, B., Lau, H., & Rosenthal, D. (2019). Subjective inflation: Phenomenology’s get-rich-quick scheme.
Current Opinion in Psychology, 29, 49–55.
Koch, C., & Preuschoff, K. (2007). Betting the house on consciousness. Nature Neuroscience, 10(2), 140–141.
Kouider, S., De Gardelle, V., Sackur, J., & Dupoux, E. (2010). How rich is consciousness? The partial awareness hypothesis.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(7), 301–307.
Lagercrantz, H. (2009). The birth of consciousness. Early Human Development, 85(10), S57–S58.
Lagercrantz, H., & Changeux, J.-P. (2009). The emergence of human consciousness: From fetal to neonatal life. Pediatric
Research, 65(3), 255–260.
Lamme, V. A. F. (2004). Separate neural definitions of visual consciousness and visual attention; a case for phenomenal
awareness. Neural Networks, 17(5-6), 861–872. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2004.02.005
Lau, H., & Rosenthal, D. (2011). Empirical support for higher-order theories of conscious awareness. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 15(8), 365–373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.05.009
Levine, J. (1983). Materialism and qualia, the explanatory gap. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 64(4), 354–361. <Go to
ISI>://WOS:A1983SU49200007
Mashour, G. A., Roelfsema, P., Changeux, J.-P., & Dehaene, S. (2020). Conscious processing and the global neuronal
workspace hypothesis. Neuron, 105(5), 776–798.
Mogensen, J., Daugaard, N., Kitsios, S., Pedersen, J. E., & Overgaard, M. (2018). Understanding the neurocognitive organi-
zation as strategies rather than functions: Implications for neurological research. Neurology, 10(11), 1008–1016.
Mogensen, J., & Overgaard, M. (2018a). Neural connections and mental states: The need for a neurocognitive framework.
Ec Neurology, 10, 180–194.
Mogensen, J., & Overgaard, M. (2018b). Reorganization of the connectivity between elementary functions as a common
mechanism of phenomenal consciousness and working memory: From functions to strategies. Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 373(1755), 20170346. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2017.0346
Mudrik, L., Mylopoulos, M., Negro, N., & Schurger, A. (2023). Theories of consciousness and a life worth living. Current
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 53, 101299. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2023.101299
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat. Philosophical Review, 83(4), 435–450. https://doi.org/10.2307/2183914
Northoff, G., & Lamme, V. (2020). Neural signs and mechanisms of consciousness: Is there a potential convergence of
theories of consciousness in sight? Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 118, 568–587.
Overgaard, M., & Kirkeby-Hinrup, A. (2021a). Finding the neural correlates of consciousness will not solve all our problems.
Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 2.
Overgaard, M., & Kirkeby-Hinrup, A. (2021b). Is learning the cognitive basis of consciousness? The moral implications of
SOMA. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 25(1), 8–9.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369

Asger Kirkeby-Hinrup and Morten Overgaard
24
Overgaard, M., & Mogensen, J. (2014). Visual perception from the perspective of a representational, non-reductionistic,
level-dependent account of perception and conscious awareness. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B: Biological Sciences, 369(1641), 20130209.
Overgaard, M., & Mogensen, J. (2015). Reconciling current approaches to blindsight. Consciousness and Cognition, 32, 33–40.
Overgaard, M., & Overgaard, R. (2010). Neural correlates of contents and levels of consciousness. Frontiers in Psychology,
1, 164.
Overgaard, M., Rote, J., Mouridsen, K., & Ramsøy, T. Z. (2006). Is conscious perception gradual or dichotomous? A com-
parison of report methodologies during a visual task. Consciousness and Cognition, 15(4), 700–708.
Passos-Ferreira, C. (forthcoming). Are infants conscious? Philosophical Perspectives. Forthcoming.
Raccah, O., Block, N., & Fox, K. C. (2021). Does the prefrontal cortex play an essential role in consciousness? Insights from
intracranial electrical stimulation of the human brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 41(10), 2076–2087.
Ramsøy, T. Z., & Overgaard, M. (2004). Introspection and subliminal perception. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences,
3(1), 1–23.
Rosenthal, D. M. (2008). Consciousness and its function. Neuropsychologia, 46(3), 829–840. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurop
sychologia.2007.11.012
Rosenthal, D. M. (2011). Exaggerated reports: Reply to block. Analysis, 71(3), 431–437.
Rosenthal, D. M. (2012). Higher-order awareness, misrepresentation and function. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 367(1594), 1424–1438. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2011.0353
Schurger, A., & Graziano, M. (2022). Consciousness explained or described? Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2022(1). https:
//doi.org/10.1093/nc/niac001
Seth, A., & Bayne, T. (2022). Theories of consciousness. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 23(7), 439–452.
Tononi, G. (2005). Consciousness, information integration, and the brain. In L. Steven (Ed.), Progress in brain research: Vols.
Volume 150 (pp. 109–126). Elsevier. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6123(05)50009-8
Weisberg, J. (2011). Abusing the notion of what-it’s-like-ness: A response to block. Analysis, 71(3), 438–443.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna-
tional License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, as long as you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license,
and indicate if changes were made.
Kirkeby-Hinrup, A., & Overgaard, M. (2023). Ontogenetic emergence as a criterion for theories of
consciousness: Comparing GNW, SOMA, and REFCON. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 4, 29.
https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2023.9902
©The author(s). https://philosophymindscience.org ISSN: 2699-0369
