PROCEEDINGS
Open Access
On consciousness, resting state fMRI,
and neurodynamics
Arvid Lundervold1,2
From Consciousness and its Measures: Joint Workshop for COST Actions NeuroMath and Consciousness
Limassol, Cyprus. 29 November – 1 December 2009
Abstract
Background: During the last years, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of the brain has been
introduced as a new tool to measure consciousness, both in a clinical setting and in a basic neurocognitive
research. Moreover, advanced mathematical methods and theories have arrived the field of fMRI (e.g.
computational neuroimaging), and functional and structural brain connectivity can now be assessed non-invasively.
Results: The present work deals with a pluralistic approach to “consciousness’’, where we connect theory and tools
from three quite different disciplines: (1) philosophy of mind (emergentism and global workspace theory), (2)
functional neuroimaging acquisitions, and (3) theory of deterministic and statistical neurodynamics – in particular
the Wilson-Cowan model and stochastic resonance.
Conclusions: Based on recent experimental and theoretical work, we believe that the study of large-scale neuronal
processes (activity fluctuations, state transitions) that goes on in the living human brain while examined with
functional MRI during “resting state”, can deepen our understanding of graded consciousness in a clinical setting,
and clarify the concept of “consiousness” in neurocognitive and neurophilosophy research.
Background
During the last decade functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) has been introduced as an experimental
tool in the study of human consciousness, e.g. [1-8].
From the early report by Binder and coworkers on “con-
ceptual processing” and “task-unrelated thoughts” cap-
tured by resting state fMRI [9], and the “default mode
network” hypothesis by Raichle et al. [10], substantial
improvements in MR image acquisition technology,
experimental designs, and image analysis methodology
have taken place. Functional MRI investigations now
provide an increasingly important source of information
to the modeling of integrative brain functions [11-16]
and modern philosophy of mind, including the emer-
gence of consciousness (e.g. [17,18]), and sophisticated
mathematical and statistical models for fMRI signal pro-
cessing and interpretation have come into play [19-30].
The present work deals with a pluralistic approach to
“consciousness”, where we try to connect theory and
tools from three quite different disciplines:
1. philosophy of mind (emergentism and global work-
space theory),
2. functional neuroimaging recordings, and
3. theory of deterministic and statistical neurodynamics
This in order to explore and review – surely prema-
turely and haltingly – an experimental and theoretical
framework for the study of large-scale neuronal pro-
cesses (activity fluctuations, state transitions) that goes
on in the conscious human brain while examined with
functional MRI during “rest”.
The occurrence of state transitions in the brain (i.e.
neurodynamics [31,32]) and the presence of noise in
neuronal systems (e.g. [33]) have been jointly investi-
gated and incorporated into the framework of stochastic
dynamical systems theory. Stochastic dynamical systems
theory (e.g. [34-36]) deals with the study of dynamical
Correspondence: arvid.lundervold@biomed.uib.no
1Department of Biomedicine, Neuroinformatics and Image Analysis
Laboratory, University of Bergen Jonas Lies vei 91, N-5009 Bergen, Norway
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
© 2010 Lundervold; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

systems (discrete or continuous rule-based time evolu-
tions on a state space) under the influence of noise. It
has been shown that the coupling of noise to nonlinear
deterministic equations of motion can lead to non-trivial
effects such as stabilizing unstable equilibriums, transi-
tions between coexisting deterministic stable states
(attractors), and enhanced response of a nonlinear sys-
tem to external signals (i.e. stochastic resonance). In our
setting, perceptions, attention, and memories have
extensively been modeled as state space attractors in
dynamical neural networks (e.g. [37,38]). We want to
explore these concepts and theoretical results in the
context of resting state fMRI [39]. These are 4-D
recordings consisting of spatial multivariate discrete
time series (Δt ~ 1-3 s) of length T (~ 4-6 min), expres-
sing local magnetic BOLD (Blood-Oxygen-Level-Depen-
dent) signal changes in a collection of n brain regions,
and can be regarded as realizations of our neurodynami-
cal system with state space Rn. In the simplest case,
each state space component xi : {1,..., T} ® R, (i = 1,...,
n) can be represented by a single brain voxel, consisting of
thousands of neurons, or be represented by a larger spatial
region as obtained from e.g. independent component ana-
lysis (spatial ICA). The joint activation pattern during the
observation period T, where neuronal activities are
embedded in noise, is denoted [x1(t),..., xn(t)]t=1,…,T, from
which “neural correlates of consciousness” (NCC) [40-42]
and dynamical state space models can be derived. This
approach has a modest relationship to the recent introduc-
tion of ensemble dynamics and neural mass models into
the imaging domain [43,44], concepts that have been per-
tinent to computational electrophysiology for many years
[21,45,46].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the
next section we briefly introduce the concepts of ‘emer-
gentism’ and the ‘global workspace theory’ which we
have found particularly relevant regarding consciousness
and the philosophy of mind in our empirical context.
Next we present the exploding field of functional mag-
netic resonance imaging and so-called resting state func-
tional connectivity MRI (rs-fcMRI) mapping, including
the default mode network (DMN) as a particular subset
of the resting state networks (RSNs) that can be com-
puted from the 4-D fMRI recordings. We also refer to
recent literature that apply these technologies in the
study of ‘consciousness’ within basic cognitive neu-
roscience and in a clinical setting (vegetative state, sleep,
anesthesia, etc.). The most widely used class of methods
for analyzing resting state fMRI recordings (i.e. ICA) is
presented in a separate section. This brings us into the
theory of dynamical systems and neurodynamics and its
application to time course data in voxels or in spatially
more extensive ICA components representing functional
networks with long-range dependencies. In an experi-
mental study we present an illustrative example, where
the fMRI data are taken from one individual in a collec-
tion of more than hundred subjects that participates in
a comprehensive and longitudinal study of cognitive
aging that includes structural and functional brain ima-
ging, neuropsychological testing and genetic profiling.
Finally, we give some concluding remarks and future
perspectives.
To guide a more detailed and mature tour, we have
deliberately provided references to relevant and recent
literature in our cross-disciplinary endeavor.
Theory and methods
Philosophy of mind, emergentism, and global workspace
theory
The concept of ‘emergence’ can be defined as (J. Gold-
stein, 1999):
... the way complex systems and patterns arise out of a
multiplicity of relatively simpler interactions - occurring
on the macro level, in contrast to the micro-level compo-
nents and processes out of which they arise. Hence, the
construct of ’emergence’ (cf. Fig. 1) is applicable to the
brain and the integrative levels of brain function in man
and animal, including ‘consciousness’.
According to [47], the common characteristics of
‘emergence’ are [here focussing on fMRI-derived “emer-
gents” of resting state networks (RSNs) including the
default mode network (DMN)]:
Radical novelty: emergents have features that are not
previously observed in the complex system being
studied.
Coherence or correlation: emergents appear as inte-
grated wholes that tend to maintain some sense of iden-
tity over time. This coherence spans and correlates the
separate lower-level components into a higher-level unity.
Global or macro level: the locus of emergent phe-
nomena occurs at a global or macro level, in contrast to
the micro-level locus of their components.
Dynamical: emergent phenomena are not pre-given
wholes but arise as a complex system evolves over time.
As a dynamical construct, emergence is associated with
the appearance of new attractors in dynamical systems
(i.e. bifurcation).
Ostensive: emergents are recognized by “showing
themselves” [in casu: can be measured by fMRI].
In this neurophilosophical landscape, where resting
state fMRI is an empirical ingredient, a particular rele-
vant position is the viewpoint of global workspace
(GW) theory or the “conscious access hypothesis” pro-
posed by Bernard Baars [48]. According to this theory
there is a global distribution of conscious content
where multiple brain networks cooperate and compete.
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 2 of 18

For such, Baars states the following theoretical claims
[49]:
“1. Conscious perception enables access to widespread
brain sources; unconscious sensory processing is much
more limited.
2. Conscious perception, inner speech, and visual
imagery enable working memory functions; there is
no evidence for unconscious access to working
memory.
3. Conscious events enable almost all kinds of learn-
ing: episodic and explicit learning, but also implicit
and skill learning.
4. Conscious perceptual feedback enables voluntary
control over motor functions, and perhaps over any
neuronal population and even single neurons.
5. Conscious contents can evoke selective attention.
6. Consciousness enables access to ‘self’ – executive
interpreters, located in part in the frontal cortex.”
Since its inception in 1983, the global workspace the-
ory has been refined and elaborated, integrating experi-
mental data and models from cognitive psychology,
artificial intelligence, electrophysiology, and neuroima-
ging [41,50-54]. Global workspace theory has thus
evolved into a comprehensive framework for empirically
based characterization and understanding of ‘conscious-
ness’, and might also show to be a useful interpretative
tool regarding neural correlates of consciousness using
computational neuroimaging with resting state fMRI
recordings (cf. [55] with commentaries, and [56,57]).
Neuroimaging and resting state fMRI
... If we hope to understand how the brain operates,
we must take into account the component that con-
sumes most of the brain’s energy: spontaneous neuro-
nal activity.
From Fox & Raichle [39]
The observation that spontaneous BOLD fMRI activity
is not random noise, but is specifically organized in the
resting human brain as functionally relevant resting-
state networks (RSNs) has generated a new avenue in
neuroimaging and cognitive research.
Biswal et al. [58] were the first to demonstrate the fea-
sibility of using fMRI to detect such spatially distributed
networks within primary motor cortex during resting-
state. From a MRI time course of 512 echo-planar
images obtained every 250 ms in the resting human
brain they calculated temporal correlations across the
brain with the time-course from a seed voxel whose spa-
tial location was chosen from a prior finger-tapping
study. Time courses of low frequency (< 0.1 Hz) fluctua-
tions where found to have a high degree of temporal
correlation within sensorimotor regions and also with
time courses in several other regions that can be asso-
ciated with motor function, and they concluded that
correlation of low frequency fluctuations in the resting
Figure 1 Mathematical and scientific roots of emergence, where the ‘route to consciousness’ is indicated by boxes (modified from [47]).
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 3 of 18

state BOLD signal is a manifestation of functional con-
nectivity of the brain. With increasing evidence during
the last decade, the common understanding is that
RSNs reflect interactions in cognitively relevant func-
tional networks of the brain and are not, as early
debated, a simple consequence of ongoing non-neuronal
physiological processes such as the cardiac and respira-
tory cycles [59] (but see also [60,61]). Resting state func-
tional connectivity MRI (rs-fcMRI), combined with
structural connectivity mapping (cf. Fig. 2), has therefore
proven to be a useful probe for functional alterations in
the brain as a consequence of changes in brain state,
disease processes, neurodevelopment and aging, phar-
macological interventions, and genetics [62-71].
Moreover, several fMRI studies have demonstrated
that some of these self-organizing, resting state networks
coincide with brain regions that are found to be deacti-
vated across several fMRI (and PET) studies where an
external stimulus or a cognitive paradigm is applied.
Thus, these brain locations are more active at rest than
during task performance. These observations have led to
the hypothesis that the brain remains active in an orga-
nized fashion during the resting state, denoted the
default mode network (DMN) [10,39]. The default mode
hypothesis has been extensively studied [10,71-78],
including direct electrophysiological measurement of
default network areas [79], and its changes in different
clinical states of consciousness [8]. The concepts and
exploration of RSNs and the DMN has therefore been
regarded as “a paradigm shift in functional brain
imaging’’[80,81].
Spatial Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
in the study of resting state fMRI
Independent component analysis (ICA) [82,83] has pro-
ven to be a powerful exploratory tool for data-driven
analysis of fMRI recordings. It is used to blindly esti-
mate distributed spatial patterns in the brain, jointly
with hidden source processes in the observed data,
under the assumptions of statistically independent pat-
terns and non-Gaussianity of the source components
[84,85]. In this setting, one typically represents the 4-D
fMRI dataset as a p × n matrix X, where the n columns
consist of an enumeration of the n voxels that covers
the imaged 3-D object of interest (i.e. the brain), and
the rows consist of the recorded signals in these voxels
at p different time points. Furthermore, one assumes
that a matrix decomposition exists such that X = AS,
where S is a p × n matrix of source signals, and A is a
Figure 2 Structural and functional connectivity assessed with multimodal MRI (anatomical T1-weighted 3D scan, diffusion tensor imaging,
BOLD fMRI).
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 4 of 18

p × pmixing matrix. This expresses that the ICA model
is a generative model that describes how the observed
data are generated by a mixing process of the compo-
nents (i.e. row vectors) in S, and that the independent
components are latent variables that cannot be directly
observed. Both A and S must be estimated from X
under some general statistical assumptions (indepen-
dence and non-Gaussianity), and the ICA method is
thus a type of blind source separation (BSS).
During ICA estimation, the matrix S is optimized to
contain, in its rows, statistically independent areas in the
brain (spatial maps, or components), each with an
internally consistent time course (the corresponding col-
umn vector in A).The observed signal intensity xij in
time sample i of voxel j is thus a weighted sum (linear
mixing) of the unobserved source signals in the voxel,
i.e. x
a s
ij
ik kj
k
p
=
=
∑
1
. With iterative optimising of an
unmixing matrixW = A-1, we obtain S = WX with
mutually independent rows using e.g. the InfoMax algo-
rithm [84,86]or the FastICA algorithm [87]. No noise
is included in the model. Typically, the spatial maps
are transformed to have zero mean and unit variance
(Z-scores), thresholded at some level (e.g. |Z| > 2.0),
and mapped back to 3-D image space, color-coded, and
superimposed on a coregistered anatomical image for
visual assessment of the ICA component.
It can be shown that the independent components are
identifiable up to a permutation and scaling of the
sources under the assumption that at most one of the
sources sk = [sk1,..., skn] (k = 1,... ,p) is Gaussian, and that
the mixing matrix A is full rank. The assumption that
the mixing matrix is square i.e. the complete case with
as many mixtures (M) as sources (K), can be relaxed
[88-90]. Important challenges are to reduce large fMRI
data sets for ICA [91] and to estimate the number of
independent components in the data [92]. Calhoun and
coworkers [93] has also introduced an approach (GIFT)
for drawing group inferences using ICA of fMRI data
from many subjects, and Beckmann et al. [94] have con-
structed a “tensor probabilistic ICA” for multisubject
fMRI analysis. These extensions have widened the scope
and popularity of ICA for fMRI studies, especially group
studies of resting state networks and the DMN (see [95]
for a comparative framework with these approaches).
Furthermore, ICA methods has also been applied to
EEG recordings and combined fMRI-EEG data [96],
with a large potential for integrated analysis of electro-
physiological recordings (with high temporal, low spatial
resolution) and BOLD image acquisitions (with high
spatial, low temporal resolution). Recently, it has been
argued that independence is not the right mathematical
framework for blind source separation in fMRI and that
representations in which the fMRI signal is spatially
sparse are more promising [97], and in their simulation
studies Daubechies et al. demonstrated that the ICA
algorithms InfoMax and FastICA select for such sparsity
of components rather than spatial independence.
Theory of dynamical systems and neurodynamics
... Neurodynamics has a peculiar property described
as the “edge of stability” or “metastability”. Accord-
ingly, the brain as a complex dynamic system is in
perpetual movement from one state to another.
When the brain reaches a dominant state, it does
not rest there, rather it immediately moves on and
decays into an unordered state, only to emerge a
moment later to another prominent state. Freeman
has identified neurophysiological correlates of this
metastable wandering along the landscape of brain
dynamics in the form of spatio-temporal patterns of
oscillations, sudden jumps or phase transitions of
local field potentials. (From [38])
To bring functional MRI into the domain of experi-
mental neurodynamics (cf. Fig. 3), we can: (i) regard
voxel time courses as the given spatio-temporal observa-
tions, or (ii) incorporate a “higher level” spatial repre-
sentation based on anatomically meaningful regions (cf.
the 38 cortical and 2 subcortical regions defined in
[43]), or (iii) incorporate regions that are derived from
spatial ICA analysis, or from cross-correlation clustering
and graph theory (pionered by [98]), or from structural
connectivity maps obtained with diffusion tensor MRI
recordings and fiber tracking.
Due to the coarse spatial resolution of fMRI (for
whole brain human studies voxel size is typically limited
to ≥1µl) and low temporal resolution (typically ≥1000
ms), these measurement techniques will only be able to
consider the granularity of ‘mesoscopic brain dynamics’,
i.e. (nonlinear) dynamics and neural activity at spatial
scales between a few millimeters and the entire brain,
and temporal scales of a few hundred milliseconds to
seconds (cf. [99]). Moreover, mesoscopic brain dynamics
is characterized by “its high complexity, often involving
oscillations of different frequencies and amplitudes, per-
haps interrupted by chaotic or pseudo-chaotic irregular
behaviour. The mesoscopic brain dynamics is affected by
the activity at other scales. For example, it is often
mixed with noise, generated at a microscopic level by
spontaneous activity of neurons and ion channels. It is
also affected by macroscopic activity, such as slow
rhythms generated by cortico-thalamic circuits or neuro-
modulatory influx from different brain regions” [100]. As
indicated above, there are a number of naturally occur-
ring ‘noise sources’ in the brain (related to e.g. channel
gating, ion concentrations, membrane conductance, and
synaptic transmission [33]) that will influence signal
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 5 of 18

measurements at mesocopic and macroscopic scales
([101]). During the last years, the importance of noise in
neural systems has been put in the context of ‘stochastic
resonance’ – and before we deal with a classical frame-
work for neural dynamics (the Wilson-Cowan model),
we will present this highly interesting and relevant
phenomenon.
Stochastic resonance
Stochastic resonance (SR) is “a mechanism by which a
system embedded in a noisy environment acquires an
enhanced sensitivity towards small external time-depen-
dent forcings, when the noise intensity reaches some finite
level” [102]. This SR effect introduces a new role of
noise processes, not only as a detrimental nuisance, but
as a constructive component in a broad range of natural
and man-made systems. The mechanism was first
observed and reported in climate research by Benzi et
al. [103] in the early 1980’s to explain the almost peri-
odic recurrences of ice ages on the earth.
Mathematically, the SR phenomenon can be captured
in a bistable nonlinear dynamical system where a one-
variable formulation could be [104]:
dx
dt
U
x
= −∂
∂
+
+
+ ( )
A
t
cos
 
t
(
)



(1)
where the state variablex(t), interpreted as e.g. the
position of a Brownian particle in a bi-stable potential
U : R ® R, is subject to both a weak periodic forcing
parameterized with amplitude A, frequency ω and initial
phase j, and a noise process ξ(t). In our example U(x)
can be the reflection-symmetric quartic potential
U x
x
x
( ) = −
+
1
2
1
4
2
4 , with minima xm located at ±1 and
with height of the potential barrier between the two
stable minima equal to ΔU = 1
4
. The noise term ξ(t) in
the stochastic differential equation (1) is typically a zero-
mean Gaussian where the SR mechanism is related to
its autocorrelation function <ξ(t), ξ(0)>, which could be
on the form D e t


−
where τ is correlation time and D
is intensity of the colored noise. The effect of SR can be
enhanced by introducing an ensemble of stochastic reso-
nators. In this case, a weak periodic signal can induce
large-scale stochastic synchronization and self-organiza-
tion (Ch. 3 in [34]).
More recently, SR has been introduced to explain
behavior in biological systems (see [105], 106 for
reviews), including single neurons and large-scale brain
systems (e.g. [107]). Neural synchrony, noise, and SR
has also been applied to the modeling of attention and
consciousness [108], and how age-related neuromodula-
tory deficiencies may contribute to increased neuronal
noise leading to less robust information processing in
aging neurocognitive systems [109,110]. Most interest-
ingly, the stochastic resonance mechanisms has recently
been proposed to explain resting state results in connec-
tivity data from BOLD fMRI experiments [43].
As an illustrative example of stochastic resonance in
basic neurophysiology, we will briefly present a simula-
tion study of the spiking behavior in a neuron with
Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) dynamics [111], where the firing
of action potentials is driven by a sinusoidal external
force and Gaussian noise. The simulation code we are
using is modified from the exposition on nonlinear
Figure 3 Functional MRI voxel time courses and spatio-temporal activity patterns in the context of experimental neurodynamics (modified
from [155]).
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 6 of 18

neurodynamics by H.R. Wilson [112] (HHnoise.m),
using a fourth order Runge-Kutta solver with constant
step size to solve the Rinzel approximation to the HH
equations:
C dV
dt
a
bV
cV
V
E
R V
E
I t
n t
dR
dt
R
R
Na
k
= −+
+
−
−
−
+
+
=
−
+
(
)(
)
.
(
)
( )
( )
(
2
26 0
1

1 35
1 03
.
.
)
V +
For the simulations we used time increment Δt = 0.02,
and a = 17.81, b = 47.71, c = 32.63, d = 26. The equili-
brium potentials were ENa = 0.55 and EK = –0.92. The
neural capacitance was C = 0.8, and the recovery time
constant τR = 1.9 ms. The stimulating oscillating current
was given as I(t) = A sin(ωt + j) with amplitude A = 0.035
and initial phase j = 0, were the ω was fixed to give an
angular input frequency of 200 Hz. We adjusted zero
mean noise level h with standard deviations (SD) in steps
of 0.01 in the range [0.0, 0.5] to observe the effect of noise
level of the system and the occurrence of stochastic reso-
nance. The results from this simulation study are given in
Fig. 4, where Figs. 4c &4e depict SR with clustering of
spike intervals corresponding to integral multiples of the
principal inter-spike interval of about 5 ms.
Linking fMRI and neurodynamical modeling
The theory of dynamical systems has been applied to fMRI
in different settings [113-118]. To explore a particularly
interesting link between fMRI and neurodynamical model-
ing in more detail, we adopt the approach taken by Deco
et al. [43]. Here, the dynamics of each ‘node’ (to be inter-
preted below) is captured by a mean-field type rate model,
expressing the coupling between excitatory and inhibitory
nodes in the network. This is very similar to the classical
attractor neural network (ANN) model stated by Amit
[37] and others.
More specifically a Wilson-Cowan [119] type neural
network dynamics is introduced, following [120,121]
du
dt
u
W u
I
i
i
ij
j
j i
i
i
= −
+
+
+
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎟
≠∑


Θ
(2)
where ui denotes the activity of the i-th ‘neuron’
(neural mass, or enumerated spatial localization i = 1,...,
n in the brain); a is inverse relaxation time; Wij is the
‘synaptic’ or connection strength between locations i and j
(i.e. the connectivity matrix); Ii is the external input to
location i; and ξi is random noise related to i. The non-
linear (e.g. sigmoidal) function Θ(x) limits the growth of
x, accounting for saturation of ‘firing rates’ or local neural
mass activity. In the ‘resting state’, external inputs to the
network nodes vanish, i.e. Ii ≡0, where we also assume
the noise terms ξi are Gaussian N(0, si), and that
saturation can be ignored, i.e. Θ(x) ≡x. With these
assumptions, the coupled stochastic ODE’s (2) can be dis-
cretized in time, with time step Δt, to obtain
u t
t
t u t
W u t
t
N
t
t
i
i
ij
j
i
j i
(
)
(
) ( )
( )
( ,
)( )
+
=
−
+
+
≠∑
Δ
Δ
Δ
Δ
1
0


(3)
which can be written on matrix form
u(t + Δt) = Au(t)+ξ(t)
(4)
where A = (1 – aΔt)1 + WΔt;ξ = N(0,s)(t)Δt, and
N(0,s)(t) denotes the noise column vector at time point
t. The temporal averaged covariance matrix of the rest-
ing state time courses is C =〈u(t) • u(t)T〉, and the
eigenvectors vk of the real-valued symmetric matrix C
are the principal components or the dominant patterns
or
modes
of
the
resting
state
activity,
i.e.
u
v
v
u
( )
( )
;
( )
( );
( )
t
a t
a t
t
a
t
k
k
k
k
T
k
k
k
n
=
=
⋅
=
=
∑

2
1
. In
[120] it is shown that the covariance matrix of the rest-
ing state activity is determined by the covariance matrix
of the intrinsic noise and the eigenvalues of the connec-
tivity matrix W. As the overall weight of each mode in
the resting state activity is given by the magnitude of
the associated eigenvalue lk, there is link between the
dominant patterns and the concept of attractor in
neural dynamics [120]. Morover, Galán [120] provides
arguments that the resting state neural activity ‘fluctu-
ates most of the time around the basin of attraction
([37,122]) of the dominant pattern’, and that ‘the
amount of time spent around the basin of attraction of
the remaining principal components is proportional to
the magnitude of their eigenvalues’.
In their simulation study of resting brain fluctuations,
Deco and co-workers [43], using the above Wilson-
Cowan model with 38 cortical and 2 subcortical thalamic
nodes and a realistic neuroanatomical connectivity matrix
and signal transmission delay between nodes in the net-
work, were able to reproduce typically occurring resting
state fMRI brain dynamics. In their synchronization ana-
lysis (employing the Kuramoto synchronization index
[123]) of simulated neuroelectric activity in each of two
individual community clusters (the occipital-temporal-
prefrontal community, and the sensorimotor-premotor
community), using internode communication velocity of
v ~ 1.65 m/s and global coupling strength of a ~ 0.007, a
global slow 0.1 Hz) oscillation at rest could emerge from
a network built up with simple fast oscillators in the
g-band of 40 Hz. This underscores the role of neural
synchronization as a mechanism for the emergence of
ultraslow fluctuations in e.g. the default mode network as
observed in resting state BOLD fMRI. Moreover, Deco
et al. also observed a stochastic resonance effect for the
same level of fluctuations that revealed optimal
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 7 of 18

emergence of 0.1 Hz global slow oscillations, with the
occurrence of anti-correlated spatiotemporal patterns (as
reported in fMRI) in both communities – without the use
of (unrealistic) long-range inhibition. From their work,
they conclude that “the particular dynamics of the intrinsic
properties of the brain are useful for keeping the system in
a high competition state between the different subnetworks
that later are used during different tasks. ... In this way, a
relatively small external stimulation is able to stabilize one
or the other subnetwork giving rise to the respective evoked
activity. So, the anticorrelated fluctuating structure of the
subnetwork patterns characteristic of the resting state is
particularly convenient for that.”
Linking consiousness and neurodynamics
The field of neurodynamics has also had impact on the
theory of consciousness [38,41,124-127] (so has
Figure 4 Stochastic resonance in a simple neuronal system with an oscillating driving force and a noise term. The simulated neuron is
modeled with Hodgkin-Huxley dynamics [112] and is stimulated by a sinusoidal current I at a frequency 200 Hz and amplitude 0.035 (a.u.) with
added zero mean Gaussian noise with standard deviation SD. At low noise levels (SD less than 0.01), spike threshold is not attained. With
increased noise (SD = 0.04) irregular spike bursts occur. At a narrow noise band, stochastic resonance occur with inter-spike interval (ISI) at about
5 ms and integral multiples of that period. We see that the neuron can miss four or more periods between spiking, but keep firing at integral
multiples of the 5 ms stimulus period. In the simulations, one could also show that (low and moderate) noise alone will not be sufficient to
drive the spiking in the absence of the periodic stimulus. In this simulation we observe that sub-threshold noise can increase the sensitivity of
the neuron to periodic stimulation - that be sensory input or input from a neuronal rhythm generator. This illustrates stochastic resonance. a)
Insufficient noise level (SD = 0.01) to trigger spikes. b) Low noise level (SD = 0.04) - infra SR. c) Stochastic resonance, SR (SD = 0.19). d) High
noise level (SD = 0.30) - supra SR. e) Magnification of the SR condition in c). Blue trace = oscillating driving force; Black trace = input noise; Red
trace = response (firing pattern) of the simulated neuron at the given noise level. The inserts in b) and d) show the corresponding inter-spike
interval histograms.
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 8 of 18

stochastic resonance [32,108,128]). A prominent exam-
ple is the ‘dynamic core hypothesis’ presented in a semi-
nal paper by Tononi and Edelman [129], and later
refined and extended [127,130,131]. Based on modeling
concepts from statistical physics and information theory,
together with accumulated empirical findings in the his-
tory of clinical and experimental neuroscience, they pro-
pose the following:
• A group of neurons can contribute directly to con-
scious experience only if it is part of a distributed
functional cluster that achieves high integration in
hundreds of milliseconds.
• To sustain conscious experience, it is essential that
this functional cluster be highly differentiated, as
indicated by high values of complexity.
• A large cluster of neuronal groups exist that
together constitute, on a time scale of hundreds of
milliseconds, a unified neural process of high com-
plexity – termed the dynamic core, where
– its participating neuronal groups are much
more strongly interactive among themselves than
with the rest of the brain
– its global activity patterns must be selected
within less than a second out of a very large
repertoire
– deliberately does not refer to a unique, invar-
iant set of brain areas (e.g. prefrontal, extrastri-
ate, or striate cortex) and,
– can transcend traditional anatomical bound-
aries and may change in composition over time
An other interesting neurodynamics theory of con-
sciousness is the COrollary Discharge of Attention Move-
ment (CODAM) model of J. G. Taylor and co-workers
[132,133], based on application of engineering control
theory and artificial neural networks. The CODAM fra-
mework is claimed to have considerable experimental
support for certain of its modules. Support that comes
from both brain imaging, ERP studies, and single cell
experiments, as well as transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion (TMS) that enables non-invasive, temporarily
‘knock out’ of brain circuitry in operator-defined cortical
regions. In this model, the so-called ‘working memory
corollary discharge (WMcd) buffer’ is the most impor-
tant element in the circuitry to create consciousness.
The framework consists of an input module (for pre-
processing in low-level visual cortex), the object map
(where object codes are stored), the inverse model con-
troller (IMC) which is a generator of the signal to move
the focus of attention in lower cortices, the corollary
discharge module where a copy of the attention move-
ment signal is stored temporarily, the working memory
(WM) holding an estimate of the attended target
representation, and the monitor producing an error sig-
nal given by the difference of the required goal signal
and that produced by the corollary discharge module as
a predictor of the attended next state or of the working
memory module activation (cf. [133]). So far, very little
work has been done to put fMRI experiments into the
CODAM framework, which might have been due to dif-
ficulties of interpreting fMRI data in terms of timing
and inhibition ( [134]).
As resting state fMRI networks revealed by e.g. inde-
pendent component analysis might represent neural
mass activity related to the state of consciousness ([17]),
further empirical investigations and numerical simula-
tions of distinct network components and their time
courses, IC1(t), ..., ICn(t), should be performed in the
framework of Wilson-Cowan type neural network
dynamics ( [43,121]). Moreover, measuring fMRI resting
state functional connectivity (rsFC) and structural con-
nectivity (SC), using DTI or diffusion spectrum imaging
tractography at high resolution in the same individuals,
it has been shown that the organizations of SC and of
rsFC are strongly interrelated [121,135] 135. In [121]
the authors applied Eq. (4) to model macroscopic corti-
cal dynamics within segmented cortical parcellations
(n=998), where the inter-nodal interaction efficacy
matrix W in the generalized coupling matrix A = (1 –
aΔt)1 + WΔt was the resampled fiber strengths
obtained from diffusion spectrum imaging tractography.
Such approaches might open up a new opportunity to
combine mutlimodal MRI and neurodynamics in the
study of consciousness.
In the following experiment, we illustrate the first
steps of deriving time course information from resting
state fMRI data that can be further analyzed in such
modeling frameworks.
An experimental resting state fMRI illustration
As an illustrative example, we report data from one sub-
ject (651) in a cohort of 100 healthy elderly people that
were scanned with a 1.5 Tesla GE Signa Excite scanner
equipped with an eight-channel head coil as part of a
larger longitudinal study of cognitive aging [136-139],
where our laboratory was responsible for the image
analysis.
Data acquisition
While the subject was lying comfortably in the scanner
with eyes closed, head fixed with noise-protecting ear-
pads, and asked not to fall asleep, we used an EPI gradi-
ent echo pulse sequence (TR / TE / FA = 2 s / 50 ms /
900); 64 × 64 acquisition matrix, 25 slices, 256 time
frames, with voxelsize = 3.75 × 3.75 × 5.5 mm3 and
time resolution of 2 s to obtain “resting state” data. In
addition, the imaging protocol consisted of an alternat-
ing left and right hand finger-tapping fMRI paradigm,
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 9 of 18

two anatomical 3D T1-weighted scans for brain segmen-
tation with FreeSurfer (http://surfer.nmr.
mgh.harvard.edu), and DTI acquisitions (TR / TE /
FA = 7900 / 104.8 / 90; 25 b=1000, 5 b=0; 25 slices;
voxelsize = 1.88 × 1.88 × 4.0 mm3) for assessment of
white matter integrity and fibertracking with TrackVis
(http://trackvis.org).
Data processing
Image processing and analysis of the “resting state
fMRI” data was carried out using Probabilistic Indepen-
dent Component Analysis [85] as implemented in
MELODIC (Multivariate Exploratory Linear Decomposi-
tion into Independent Components) Version 3.09, part
of FSL (FMRIB’s Software Library, http://www.
fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl) [29]. The following data pre-
processing was applied to the input data: masking of
non-brain voxels; voxel-wise de-meaning of the data;
normalization of the voxel-wise variance; Pre-processed
data were whitened and projected into a 60-dimensional
subspace using probabilistic Principal Component
Analysis where the number of dimensions was estimated
using the Laplace approximation to the Bayesian evi-
dence of the model order [85,140]. The whitened obser-
vations were decomposed into sets of vectors which
describe signal variation across the temporal domain
(time-courses) and across the spatial domain (maps) by
optimizing for non-Gaussian spatial source distributions
using a fixed-point iteration technique [87]. Estimated
Component maps were divided by the standard devia-
tion of the residual noise and thresholded by fitting a
mixture model to the histogram of intensity values [85].
Figure 5 shows recorded images and a voxel time course
from the subject, while Fig. 6 depicts MELODIC com-
ponent no. 45, representing the default mode network.
A more advanced processing scheme of the multimo-
dal MRI acquisitions from the same subject (651),
combining both structural connectivity information
from DTI recordings and functional connectivity from
resting state fMRI recordings, is shown in Fig. 7. [The
original acquisitions Anatomyi.nii, Anatomy2.
Figure 5 Voxel time course in right cerebral hemisphere from subject 651. a) Time frame from the resting state fMRI recording, where a
voxel-of-interest in the visual area of the occipital lobe is marked with a cross-hair. b) Corresponding voxel in the 3D Tl-weighted anatomical
image. c) Same voxel in the volume-rendered 3D anatomical image obtained with MRIcron (http://www.sph.sc.edu/comd/
rorden/MRicron) d) Plot of signal intensity (S.I.) versus time for the same voxel.
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 10 of 18

nii, DWI.nii, bvec.dat, bval.dat, Resting.
nii, Fingertapping.nii are available in NIFTI-1
format from the author; see also http://sites.
google.com/site/hufy372 ]
Concluding remarks and perspectives
During the last few years, functional MRI has been
introduced as a new tool to measure consciousness, both
in a clinical setting and in basic neurocognitive research
[1,2,7,8,18,141-153], and advanced methods and theories
(e.g. computational neuroimaging) has arrived the field
of fMRI [114,121,154-158]. The aim of this paper has
been to present the great excitement (and limitations)
regarding the use of fMRI as a tool for the study of
one of the Big Questions - the neural correlates of
consciousness.
To end up with a more balanced picture regarding the
measurement of NCC, we have also to address electrical
neuroimaging (e.g. [159]) and the assessment of neuro-
dynamics at subsecond time scale - not yet possible
Figure 6 a) Spatial extension of MELODIC component no. 45, a thresholded IC map, representing the default mode network. b) The temporal
mode or timecourse of component no. 45. c) Powerspectrum of timecourse belonging to component no. 45. Note the peaks in the low
frequency band ~ 0.01 – 0.02 Hz.
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 11 of 18

with MRI. Up to now, electrophysiology has had much
greater impact than fMRI on the study of consciousness,
both in the clinics [160-162] and in basic research
[163,164]. However, during the last years the technology
for obtaining simultaneous recordings of multichannel
electroencephalography (EEG) and BOLD fMRI acquisi-
tions has been developed. This technology, involving
both hardware solutions and clever data analysis,
exploits and joins the advantages of each technique -
the high spatial resolution of fMRI and the high tem-
poral resolution of EEG. Due to these developments
there are an increasing number of investigations being
performed, both in the clinics (e.g. epilepsy) and in neu-
rocognitive research that uses simultaneous EEG-fMRI
recordings to disentangle brain processes and spatio-
temporal activity patterns [75,96,165-177]. Recently,
Musso et al. [178], using a novel EEG-fMRI analysis
approach to explore resting-state networks, were able to
show that the information contained within EEG micro-
states on a millisecond timescale was able to elicit
BOLD activation patterns consistent with well known
RSNs - “opening new avenues for multimodal imaging
data processing”. Finally, direct mapping of neuronal
activity using MRI detection has been demonstrated
[179-182], but seems not to be very promising, or of
practical value, so far [183].
To conclude this paper, we will briefly bring up some
themes and challenging topics that need to be clarified,
Figure 7 Integration of structural connectivity (DTI) and functional resting state networks (fMRI). All derived information from the
multimodal MRI examination (subj651) was obtained automatically with different freely-available analysis tools. Coregistration was performed in
Matlab. a) Tl-weighted anatomical 3-D image superimposed with: (i) anatomical region (thalamus) segmented by FreeSurfer; (ii) resting state
networks (RSNs) derived from ICA analysis (GIFT) of the BOLD fMRI recordings; (iii) white matter fiber tracts (TrackVis) between these regions of
interest (ROIs). Yellow blob is the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) component of the default mode network (DMN). b) Corresponding time
courses (256 frames; TR= 2 s) of the resting state components. Upper trace is IC-3 (DMN). Lower trace is IC-26 located in the central thalamic
region (not part of the DMN). c) Histogram of the FA values, reflecting white matter integrity and structural connectivity along the fiber tracts
between the two regions: (i) spatial intersection between anatomical thalamus and the RSN defined by IC-26, and (ii) the VMPFC component of
DMN defined by IC-3. [Courtesy of Martin Ystad, Tome Eichele, Erlend Hodneland, and Judit Haasz]
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 12 of 18

or incorporated into experimental procedures and mod-
eling frameworks:
• The emergence of human consciousness [184]
• Consciousness without a cerebral cortex? [185] Is
your brain really necessary? [186]
• The possibility or plausibility of quantum informa-
tion processing capabilities of neuronal microtubules
(MT) and relation to consciousness, with proponents
[187-193] and opponents [195-197]
• Different time scales in the brain [198,199]
• Fast dynamics in local and large-scale networks
[200], and hierarchy of attractors [201]
• Direct correlations between the BOLD response
and neuronal electrophysiology [202,203]
• Resting state fMRI - “spatially sparse” rather than
“spatially independent” componets? [97]
•
Mind
reading
using
fMRI
time
courses
[14,183,204-207]
• Consciosness and unilateral neglect [208] – the
role of fMRI? [209,210]
• Graded consciousness and fMRI [1,7,8,67,70,
142,144,211-219] and unconscious cognitive control
[146,220].
Finally, within frameworks of emergentism, global work-
space theory, dynamic core hypothesis, and the CODAM
model we believe the combination of (i) resting state fMRI
(functional connectivity), (ii) diffusion tensor MR imaging
(structural connectivity), and (iii) neurodynamical model-
ing will bring a new set of tools to the study of conscious-
ness and cognition – that be during early development,
during aging and neurodegeneration, and in altered brain
states such as anesthesia, sleep, and meditation.
List of abbreviations used
4-D: four dimensional (3-D + time); ANN: attractor neural network; BOLD:
blood-oxygenation-level-dependent; BSS: blind source separation; CODAM:
COrollary Discharge of Attention Movement; DMN: default mode network;
DTI: diffusion tensor imaging; EEG: electroencephalography; ERP: event
related potentials; FA: flip angle (in MRI); fMRI: functional magnetic
resonance imaging; GW: global workspace (theory); HH: Hodgkin-Huxley
(dynamics); IC: independent (spatial) component; ICA: independent
component analysis; MT: microtubule; NCC: neural correlates of
consciousness; NMM: neural mass model; ODE: ordinary differential equation;
PET: positron emission tomography; rsFC: resting state functional
connectivity; RSN: resting state network; SC: structural connectivity; SDE:
stochastic differential equation; SR: stochastic resonance; TE: echo time (in
MRI); TMS: transcranial magnetic stimulation; TR: repetition time (in MRI);
VMPFC: ventromedial prefrontal cortex; WM: working memory.
Acknowledgements
I will thank students and colleagues in the Neuroscience and Imaging
groups at University of Bergen. In particular MD PhD Tom Eichele and MD
Martin Ystad for being instrumental in the resting state fMRI analysis; PhD
Erlend Hodneland for his mathematical and programming skills, Prof. Astri J.
Lundervold for providing access to the “Cognitive aging project”, and MSc
Alexander Lundervold for useful discussions on mathematical issues. I will
also thank Lars Walløe and Dagfinn Føllesdal at University of Oslo for their
cross-disciplinary Seminar series in the mid-70’s, which initiated my interest
in ‘Hjerne & Bevissthet’. Finally, thanks to the organizers of Consciousness and
its Measures - Joint workshop for COST actions Consciousness (BM0605) and
NeuroMath (BM0601), November 29 - December 1 2009, Limassol, Cyprus for
making this work possible.
This article has been published as part of Nonlinear Biomedical Physics
Volume 4 Supplement 1, 2010: Consciousness and its Measures: Joint
Workshop for COST Actions Neuromath and Consciousness. The full
contents of the supplement are available online at
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/supplements/4/S1.
Author details
1Department of Biomedicine, Neuroinformatics and Image Analysis
Laboratory, University of Bergen Jonas Lies vei 91, N-5009 Bergen, Norway.
2Department of Radiology, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen,
Norway.
Authors information
Arvid Lundervold has a BSc in mathematics and philosophy from the
University of Oslo (1975) and got his medical degree (MD) from the same
university (1982). While in Oslo he also worked with experimental epilepsy
(the hippocampal slice preparation) at the Institute of Neurophysiology and
at the National Hospital. He obtained his PhD ("Multispectral Analysis,
Classification and Quantification in Medical Magnetic Resonance Imaging”) at
the University of Bergen in 1995. He has professional experience in medical
informatics from the National Hospital in Oslo (1984-1988), and as research
scientist at the Norwegian Computing Center, Image Analysis and Pattern
Recognition group (1989-1994), before he came to the University of Bergen
in 1994. He his currently a Professor in medical information technology at
the University of Bergen, Department of Biomedicine, and head of the
Neuroinformatics and Image Analysis Laboratory. Lundervold is also affiliated
with the Department of Radiology, Haukeland University Hospital. He has
published more than 100 papers and conference reports related to medical
image analysis, pattern recognition, and neuroinformatics. Lundervold has
supervised or co-supervised more than twenty Master and PhD students
with their basic training from mathematics, computer science, medicine, or
physiology. He has participated in the European COST B11 action
("Quantitation of Magnetic Resonance Image Texture”), the COST B21 (
“Physiological Modelling of MR Image Formation”), and the COST BM0601
("NEUROMATH - Advanced Methods for the Estimation of Human Brain
Activity and Connectivity”). He is on the editorial board of Computerized
Medical Imaging and Graphics and of Frontiers in Neuroinformatics.
Lundervold is member of the Norwegian Medical Association, the
International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, the IEEE
Computer Society, and the American Mathematical Society.
Competing interests
The author declare that he has no competing interests.
Published: 3 June 2010
References
1.
Bærentsen KB, Stødkilde-Jørgensen H, Sommerlund B, Hartmann T,
Damsgaard-Madsen J, Fosnæs M, Green AC: An investigation of brain
processes supporting meditation. Cogn Process 2010, 11:57-84.
2.
Boly M, Coleman MR, Davis MH, Hampshire A, Bor D, Moonen G,
Maquet PA, Pickard JD, Laureys S, Owen AM: When thoughts become
action: an fMRI paradigm to study volitional brain activity in non-
communicative brain injured patients. Neuroimage 2007, 36(3):979-992.
3.
Coleman MR, Davis MH, Rodd JM, Robson T, Ali A, Owen AM, Pickard JD:
Towards the routine use of brain imaging to aid the clinical diagnosis of
disorders of consciousness. Brain 2009, 132(Pt 9):2541-2552.
4.
Immordino-Yang MH, McColl A, Damasio H, Damasio A: Neural correlates
of admiration and compassion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106(19):8021-8026.
5.
Jardri R, Pins D, Bubrovszky M, Lucas B, Lethuc V, Delmaire C, Vantyghem V,
Despretz P, Thomas P: Neural functional organization of hallucinations in
schizophrenia: multisensory dissolution of pathological emergence in
consciousness. Conscious Cogn 2009, 18(2):449-457.
6.
Lloyd D: Functional MRI and the study of human consciousness. J Cogn
Neurosci 2002, 14:818-831.
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 13 of 18

7.
Soddu A, Boly M, Nir Y, Noirhomme Q, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Demertzi A,
Arzi A, Ovadia S, Stanziano M, Papa M, Laureys S, Malach R: Reaching
across the abyss: recent advances in functional magnetic resonance
imaging and their potential relevance to disorders of consciousness.
Prog Brain Res 2009, 177:261-274.
8.
Vanhaudenhuyse A, Noirhomme Q, Tshibanda LJF, Bruno MA, Boveroux P,
Schnakers C, Soddu A, Perlbarg V, Ledoux D, Brichant JF, Moonen G,
Maquet P, Greicius MD, Laureys S, Boly M: Default network connectivity
reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-
damaged patients. Brain 2010, 133(Pt 1):161-171.
9.
Binder JR, Frost JA, Hammeke TA, Bellgowan PS, Rao SM, Cox RW:
Conceptual processing during the conscious resting state: A functional
MRI study. J Cogn Neurosci 2002, 11:80-95.
10.
Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, Powers WJ, Gusnard DA, Shulman GL: A
default mode of brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98(2):676-682.
11.
Kahane G, Savulescu J: Brain damage and the moral significance of
consciousness. J Med Philos 2009, 34:6-26.
12.
Kapogiannis D, Barbey AK, Su M, Zamboni G, Krueger F, Grafman J:
Cognitive and neural foundations of religious belief. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2009, 106(12):4876-4881.
13.
Laureys S, Boly M: What is it like to be vegetative or minimally
conscious? Curr Opin Neurol 2007, 20(6):609-613.
14.
Norman KA, Polyn SM, Detre GJ, Haxby JV: Beyond mind-reading: multi-
voxel pattern analysis of fMRI data. Trends Cogn Sci 2006, 10:424-430,
[(Comment in: Trends Cogn Sci. 2007;11(1):4-5)].
15.
Thaut MH, Demartin M, Sanes JN: Brain networks for integrative rhythm
formation. PLoS One 2008, 3(5):e2312.
16.
Tzagarakis C, Jerde TA, Lewis SM, Ugurbil K, Georgopoulos AP: Cerebral
cortical mechanisms of copying geometrical shapes: a multidimensional
scaling analysis of fMRI patterns of activation. Exp Brain Res 2009,
194(3):369-380.
17.
He BJ, Raichle ME: The fMRI signal, slow cortical potential and
consciousness. Trends Cogn Sci 2009, 13:302-309, [(Comment in: Trends
Cogn Sci. 2009;13(9):367-369)].
18.
Schurger A, Pereira F, Treisman A, Cohen JD: Reproducibility distinguishes
conscious from nonconscious neural representations. Science 2010,
327(5961):97-99.
19.
Bullmore E, Sporns O: Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis
of structural and functional systems. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009,
10(3):186-198.
20.
Chang C, Glover GH: Time-frequency dynamics of resting-state brain
connectivity measured with fMRI. Neuroimage 2009 [http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.011].
21.
Deco G, Jirsa VK, Robinson PA, Breakspear M, Friston K: The dynamic brain:
from spiking neurons to neural masses and cortical fields. PLoS Comput
Biol 2008, 4(8):e1000092.
22.
Deco G, Rolls ET, Romo R: Stochastic dynamics as a principle of brain
function. Prog Neurobiol 2009, 88:1-16.
23.
Friston KJ, Trujillo-Barreto N, Daunizeau J: DEM: a variational treatment of
dynamic systems. Neuroimage 2008, 41(3):849-885.
24.
van den Heuvel M, Mandl R, Pol HH: Normalized cut group clustering of
resting-state FMRI data. PLoS One 2008, 3(4):e2001.
25.
Johnston LA, Duff E, Mareels I, Egan GF: Nonlinear estimation of the BOLD
signal. Neuroimage 2008, 40(2):504-514.
26.
Mezer A, Yovel Y, Pasternak O, Gorfine T, Assaf Y: Cluster analysis of
resting-state fMRI time series. Neuroimage 2009, 45(4):1117-1125.
27.
Stephan KE, Kasper L, Harrison LM, Daunizeau J, den Ouden HEM,
Breakspear M, Friston KJ: Nonlinear dynamic causal models for fMRI.
Neuroimage 2008, 42(2):649-662.
28.
Suckling J, Wink AM, Bernard FA, Barnes A, Bullmore E: Endogenous
multifractal brain dynamics are modulated by age, cholinergic blockade
and cognitive performance. J Neurosci Methods 2008, 174(2):292-300.
29.
Woolrich MW, Jbabdi S, Patenaude B, Chappell M, Makni S, Behrens T,
Beckmann C, Jenkinson M, Smith SM: Bayesian analysis of neuroimaging
data in FSL. Neuroimage 2009, 45(1Suppl):S173-S186.
30.
Xie X, Cao Z, Weng X: Spatiotemporal nonlinearity in resting-state fMRI
of the human brain. Neuroimage 2008, 40(4):1672-1685.
31.
Freeman WJ: Neurodynamics: An Exploration in Mesoscopic Brain
Dynamics (Perspectives in Neural Computing). SpringerVerlag 2000.
32.
Ward LM: Dynamical Cognitive Science. MIT / Bradford Books 2002.
33.
Faisal AA, Selen LPJ, Wolpert DM: Noise in the nervous system. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2008, 9(4):292-303.
34.
Anishchenko VS, Astakhov V, Neiman A, Vadivasova T, Schimansky-Geier L:
Nonlinear Dynamics of Chaotic and Stochastic Systems: Tutorial and
Modern Developments. Springer, 2nd 2007.
35.
Barrat A, Barthelemy M, Vespignani A: Dynamical Processes on Complex
Networks. Cambridge University Press 2008.
36.
Laing C, Lord GJ (Eds): Stochastic Methods in Neuroscience. Oxford
University Press 2010.
37.
Amit DJ: Modeling Brain Function: The World of Attractor Neural
Networks. Cambridge University Press 1989.
38.
Perlovsky LI, Kozma R (Eds): Neurodynamics of Cognition and,
Consciousness. Springer 2007.
39.
Fox MD, Raichle ME: Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed
with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci 2007,
8(9):700-711.
40.
Hohwy J: The neural correlates of consciousness: new experimental
approaches needed? Conscious Cogn 2009, 18(2):428-438.
41.
Raffone A, Srinivasan N: An adaptive workspace hypothesis about the
neural correlates of consciousness: insights from neuroscience and
meditation studies. Prog Brain Res 2009, 176:161-180.
42.
Tononi G, Koch C: The neural correlates of consciousness: an update.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2008, 1124:239-261.
43.
Deco G, Jirsa V, McIntosh AR, Sporns O, Kötter R: Key role of coupling,
delay, and noise in resting brain fluctuations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106(25):10302-10307.
44.
Friston K, Dolan R: Computational and dynamic models in neuroimaging.
NeuroImage 2010 [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.068].
45.
Buice MA, Cowan JD: Statistical mechanics of the neocortex. Prog Biophys
Mol Biol 2009, 99(2-3):53-86.
46.
da Silva FHL, van Rotterdam A, Barts P, van Heusden E, Burr W: Models of
neuronal populations: the basic mechanisms of rhythmicity. Prog Brain
Res 1976, 45:281-308.
47.
Goldstein J: Emergence as a construct: History and issues. Emergence
1999, 1:49-72.
48.
Baars BJ: In the theatre of consciousness: Global workspace theory, a
rigorous scientific theory of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness
Studies 1997, 4:292-309 [http://www.imprint.co.uk/theatre.htm].
49.
Baars BJ: The global brainweb: An update on global workspace theory.
Science and Consciousness Review 2003 [http://cogweb.ucla.edu/CogSci/
Baars-update_03.html].
50.
Baars BJ: The conscious access hypothesis: origins and recent evidence.
Trends Cogn Sci 2002, 6:47-52.
51.
Cho SB, Baars BJ, Newman J: A neural global workspace model for
conscious attention. Neural Netw 1997, 10(7):1195-1206.
52.
Dehaene S, Naccache L: Towards a cognitive neuroscience of
consciousness: basic evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition
2001, 79(1-2):1-37.
53.
Dehaene S, Changeux JP: Ongoing spontaneous activity controls access
to consciousness: a neuronal model for inattentional blindness. PLoS
Biol 2005, 3(5):e141.
54.
Reuter F, Cul AD, Malikova I, Naccache L, Confort-Gouny S, Cohen L,
Cherif AA, Cozzone PJ, Pelletier J, Ranjeva JP, Dehaene S, Audoin B: White
matter damage impairs access to consciousness in multiple sclerosis.
Neuroimage 2009, 44(2):590-599.
55.
Block N: Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh between psychology
and neuroscience. Behav Brain Sci 2007, 30(56):481-99, discussion 499-548.
56.
Song X, Tang X: The division of labor for internal-external information
processing : An extended theory of Global Workspace about
consciousness. The 12th Annual Meeting of the Association for the Scientific
Study of Consciousness (ASSC2008) National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan. 2008 [http://www.theassc.org/files/assc/ASSC2008r.pdf].
57.
Werner G: Consciousness related neural events viewed as brain state
space transitions. Cogn Neurodyn 2009, 3:83-95.
58.
Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS: Functional connectivity in the
motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magn
Reson Med 1995, 34(4):537-541.
59.
Beckmann CF, DeLuca M, Devlin JT, Smith SM: Investigations into resting-
state connectivity using independent component analysis. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2005, 360(1457):1001-1013.
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 14 of 18

60.
Birn RM, Murphy K, Bandettini PA: The effect of respiration variations on
independent component analysis results of resting state functional
connectivity. Hum Brain Mapp 2008, 29(7):740-750.
61.
Chang C, Glover GH: Effects of model-based physiological noise
correction on default mode network anti-correlations and correlations.
Neuroimage 2009, 47(4):1448-1459.
62.
Broyd SJ, Demanuele C, Debener S, Helps SK, James CJ, Sonuga-Barke EJS:
Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic
review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2009, 33(3):279-296.
63.
Damoiseaux JS, Beckmann CF, Arigita EJS, Barkhof F, Scheltens P, Stam CJ,
Smith SM, Rombouts SARB: Reduced resting-state brain activity in
the ‘’default network’’ in normal aging. Cereb Cortex 2008,
18(8):1856-1864.
64.
Fair DA, Cohen AL, Dosenbach NUF, Church JA, Miezin FM, Barch DM,
Raichle ME, Petersen SE, Schlaggar BL: The maturing architecture of the
brain’s default network. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(10):4028-4032.
65.
Fair DA, Cohen AL, Power JD, Dosenbach NUF, Church JA, Miezin FM,
Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE: Functional brain networks develop from a
‘local to distributed’ organization. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5(5):e1000381.
66.
Filippini N, MacIntosh BJ, Hough MG, Goodwin GM, Frisoni GB, Smith SM,
Matthews PM, Beckmann CF, Mackay CE: Distinct patterns of brain activity
in young carriers of the APOE-epsilon4 allele. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106(17):7209-7214.
67.
Fransson P, Skiold B, Engström M, Hallberg B, Mosskin M, Aden U,
Lagercrantz H, Blennow M: Spontaneous brain activity in the newborn
brain during natural sleep-an fMRI study in infants born at full term.
Pediatr Res 2009, 66(3):301-305.
68.
Greicius MD, Srivastava G, Reiss AL, Menon V: Default-mode network
activity distinguishes Alzheimer’s disease from healthy aging: evidence
from functional MRI. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101(13):4637-4642.
69.
Luca MD, Beckmann CF, Stefano ND, Matthews PM, Smith SM: fMRI resting
state networks define distinct modes of long-distance interactions in the
human brain. Neuroimage 2006, 29(4):1359-1367.
70.
Monti MM, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Coleman MR, Boly M, Pickard JD,
Tshibanda L, Owen AM, Laureys S: Willful modulation of brain activity in
disorders of consciousness. N Engl J Med 2010, 362(7):579-589.
71.
Zhang D, Raichle ME: Disease and the brain’s dark energy. Nat Rev Neurol
2010, 6:15-28.
72.
Bellec P, Perlbarg V, Jbabdi S, Pelegrini-Issac M, Anton JL, Doyon J, Benali H:
Identification of large-scale networks in the brain using fMRI.
Neuroimage 2006, 29(4):1231-1243.
73.
Cole MW, Pathak S, Schneider W: Identifying the brain’s most globally
connected regions. Neuroimage 2009.
74.
Greicius MD, Krasnow B, Reiss AL, Menon V: Functional connectivity in the
resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:253-258.
75.
Jann K, Dierks T, Boesch C, Kottlow M, Strik W, Koenig T: BOLD correlates
of EEG alpha phase-locking and the fMRI default mode network.
Neuroimage 2009, 45(3):903-916.
76.
Laird AR, Eickhoff SB, Li K, Robin DA, Glahn DC, Fox PT: Investigating the
functional heterogeneity of the default mode network using coordinate-
based meta-analytic modeling. J Neurosci 2009, 29(46):14496-14505.
77.
Mayer JS, Roebroeck A, Maurer K, Linden DEJ: Specialization in the default
mode: Task-induced brain deactivations dissociate between visual
working memory and attention. Hum Brain Mapp 2010, 31:126-139.
78.
Raichle ME, Snyder AZ: A default mode of brain function: a brief history
of an evolving idea. Neuroimage 2007, 37(4):1083-90, discussion 1097-9.
79.
Miller KJ, Weaver KE, Ojemann JG: Direct electrophysiological
measurement of human default network areas. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106(29):12174-12177.
80.
Raichle ME: A paradigm shift in functional brain imaging. J Neurosci
2009, 29(41):12729-12734.
81.
Raichle ME: The brain’s dark energy. Sci Am 2010, 302(3):44-49.
82.
Comon P: Independent component analysis, A new concept? Signal
Processing 1994, 36(3):287-314, [Higher Order Statistics].
83.
Hyvarinen A, Oja E: Independent component analysis: algorithms and
applications. Neural Netw 2000, 13(4-5):411-430.
84.
McKeown MJ, Makeig S, Brown GG, Jung TP, Kindermann SS, Bell AJ,
Sejnowski TJ: Analysis of fMRI data by blind separation into independent
spatial components. Hum Brain Mapp 1998, 6(3):160-188.
85.
Beckmann CF, Smith SM: Probabilistic independent component analysis
for functional magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE Trans Med Imaging
2004, 23(2):137-152.
86.
Bell AJ, Sejnowski TJ: An information-maximization approach to blind
separation and blind deconvolution. Neural Comput 1995, 7(6):1129-1159.
87.
Hyvarinen A: Fast and robust fixed-point algorithms for independent
component analysis. IEEE Trans Neural Netw 1999, 10(3):626-634.
88.
Amari S: Natural gradient learning for over- and under-complete bases
in ICA. Neural Comput 1999, 11(8):1875-1883.
89.
Theis FJ, Jung A, Puntonet CG, Lang EW: Linear geometric ICA:
fundamentals and algorithms. Neural Comput 2003, 15(2):419-439.
90.
Caiafa CF, Cichocki A: Estimation of sparse nonnegative sources from
noisy overcomplete mixtures using MAP. Neural Comput 2009,
21(12):3487-3518.
91.
Wang Z, Wang J, Calhoun V, Rao H, Detre JA, Childress AR: Strategies for
reducing large fMRI data sets for independent component analysis.
Magn Reson Imaging 2006, 24(5):591-596.
92.
Li YO, Adali T, Calhoun VD: Estimating the number of independent
components for functional magnetic resonance imaging data. Hum
Brain Mapp 2007, 28(11):1251-1266.
93.
Calhoun VD, Adali T, Pearlson GD, Pekar JJ: A method for making group
inferences from functional MRI data using independent component
analysis. Hum Brain Mapp 2001, 14(3):140-151.
94.
Beckmann CF, Smith SM: Tensorial extensions of independent
component analysis for multisubject FMRI analysis. Neuroimage 2005,
25:294-311.
95.
Guo Y, Pagnoni G: A unified framework for group independent
component analysis for multi-subject fMRI data. Neuroimage 2008,
42(3):1078-1093.
96.
Eichele T, Calhoun VD, Debener S: Mining EEG-fMRI using independent
component analysis. Int J Psychophysiol 2009, 73:53-61.
97.
Daubechies I, Roussos E, Takerkart S, Benharrosh M, Golden C, D’Ardenne K,
Richter W, Cohen JD, Haxby J: Independent component analysis for brain
fMRI does not select for independence. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106(26):10415-10422.
98.
Dodel S, Herrmann JM, Geisel T: Functional connectivity by cross-
correlation clustering. Neurocomputing 2002, 44-46:1065-1070 [http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/S0925-2312(02)00416-2].
99.
Freeman WJ: Mesoscopic neurodynamics: from neuron to brain. J Physiol
Paris 2000, 94(5-6):303-322.
100. Liljenströom H: Mesoscopic brain dynamics. Scholarpedia. 2000 [http://www.
scholarpedia.org/article/Mesoscopic_brain_dynamics], (visited 2010/01/30).
101. Ringach DL: Spontaneous and driven cortical activity: implications for
computation. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2009, 19(4):439-444.
102. Rouvas-Nicolis C, Nicolis G: Stochastic resonance. Scholarpedia 2007,
2(11):1474 [http://dx.doi.org/10.4249/scholarpedia.1474], [Visited 2010/01/
30].
103. Benzi R, Parisi G, Sutera A, Vulpiani A: Stochastic resonance in climate
change. Tellus 1982, 34:10-16.
104. Gammaitoni L, Hanggi P, Jung P, Marchesoni F: Stochastic resonance.
Reviews of Modern Physics 1998, 70:223-233.
105. Moss F, Ward LM, Sannita WG: Stochastic resonance and sensory
information processing: a tutorial and review of application. Clin
Neurophysiol 2004, 115(2):267-281.
106. McDonnell MD, Abbott D: What is stochastic resonance? Definitions,
misconceptions, debates, and its relevance to biology. PLoS Comput Biol
2009, 5(5):e1000348-1.
107. Longtin A: Stochastic resonance in neuron models. Journal of Statistical
Physics 1993, 70:309-327.
108. Ward LM, Doesburg SM, Kitajo K, MacLean SE, Roggeveen AB: Neural
synchrony in stochastic resonance, attention, and consciousness. Can J
Exp Psychol 2006, 60(4):319-326.
109. Li SC, von Oertzen T, Lindenberger U: A neurocomputational model of
stochastic resonance and aging. Neurocomputing 2006, 69:1553-1560.
110. MacDonald SWS, Li SC, Böackman L: Neural underpinnings of within-
person variability in cognitive functioning. Psychol Aging 2009,
24(4):792-808.
111. Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF: A quantitative description of membrane current
and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J Physiol 1952,
117(4):500-544.
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 15 of 18

112. Wilson HR: Spikes, Decisions and Actions: Dynamical Foundations of
Neuroscience. Oxford University Press 1999.
113. Friston KJ: Bayesian estimation of dynamical systems: an application to
fMRI. Neuroimage 2002, 16(2):513-530.
114. Hanson SJ, Gagliardi AD, Hanson C: Solving the brain synchrony
eigenvalue problem: conservation of temporal dynamics (fMRI) over
subjects doing the same task. J Comput Neurosci 2009, 27:103-114.
115. Makni S, Beckmann C, Smith S, Woolrich M: Bayesian deconvolution of
[corrected] fMRI data using bilinear dynamical systems. Neuroimage
2008, 42(4):1381-1396.
116. Stephan KE: On the role of general system theory for functional
neuroimaging. J Anat 2004, 205(6):443-470.
117. Stam CJ, Reijneveld JC: Graph theoretical analysis of complex networks in
the brain. Nonlinear Biomed Phys 2007, 1:3.
118. Sömbul U, Santos JM, Pauly JM: Improved time series reconstruction for
dynamic magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 2009,
28(7):1093-1104.
119. Wilson HR, Cowan JD: A mathematical theory of the functional dynamics
of cortical and thalamic nervous tissue. Kybernetik 1973, 13(2):55-80.
120. Galan R: On how network architecture determines the dominant
patterns of spontaneous neural activity. PLoS One 2008, 3(5):e2148.
121. Honey CJ, Sporns O, Cammoun L, Gigandet X, Thiran JP, Meuli R,
Hagmann P: Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from
structural connectivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(6):2035-2040.
122. Jirsa V, McIntosh A (Eds): Handbook of brain connectivity. Springer-Verlag 2007.
123. Acebron JA, Bonilla LL, Perez Vicente CJ, Ritort F, Spigler R: The Kuramoto
model: A simple paradigm for synchronization phenomena. Reviews of
Modern Physics 2005, 77:137-185 [http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
RevModPhys.77.137].
124. Khrennikov AY: Toward an adequate mathematical model of mental
space: conscious/unconscious dynamics on m-adic trees. Biosystems
2007, 90(3):656-675.
125. Panksepp J: Affective consciousness: Core emotional feelings in animals
and humans. Conscious Cogn 2005, 14:30-80.
126. Poznanski RR: Model-based neuroimaging for cognitive computing. J
Integr Neurosci 2009, 8(3):345-369.
127. Seth AK, Izhikevich E, Reeke GN, Edelman GM: Theories and measures of
consciousness: an extended framework. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103(28):10799-10804.
128. Haynes JD, Rees G: Predicting the stream of consciousness from activity
in human visual cortex. Curr Biol 2005, 15(14):1301-1307.
129. Tononi G, Edelman GM: Consciousness and complexity. Science 1998,
282(5395):1846-1851.
130. Quyen MLV: Disentangling the dynamic core: a research program for a
neurodynamics at the large-scale. Biol Res 2003, 36:67-88.
131. Werner G: Brain dynamics across levels of organization. J Physiol Paris
2007, 101(4-6):273-279.
132. Taylor JG: CODAM model: Through attention to consciousness.
Scholarpedia 2007, 2(11):1598 [http://dx.doi.org/10.4249/scholarpedia.1598].
133. Taylor JG: On the neurodynamics of the creation of consciousness. Cogn
Neurodyn 2007, 1(2):97-118.
134. Korsten NJH, Fragopanagos N, Hartley M, Taylor N, Taylor JG: Attention as a
controller. Neural Netw 2006, 19(9):1408-1421.
135. Skudlarski P, Jagannathan K, Calhoun V, Hampson M, Skudlarska B, Pearlson G:
Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting
state temporal correlations. Neuroimage 2008, 43(3):554-561.
136. Andersson M, Ystad M, Lundervold A, Lundervold AJ: Correlations between
measures of executive attention and cortical thickness of left posterior
middle frontal gyrus - a dichotic listening study. Behav Brain Funct 2009, 5:41.
137. Klauschen F, Goldman A, Barra V, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Lundervold A:
Evaluation of automated brain MR image segmentation and volumetry
methods. Hum Brain Mapp 2009, 30(4):1310-1327.
138. Ystad MA, Lundervold AJ, Wehling E, Espeseth T, Rootwelt H, Westlye LT,
Andersson M, Adolfsdottir S, Geitung JT, Fjell AM, Reinvang I, Lundervold A:
Hippocampal volumes are important predictors for memory function in
elderly women. BMC Med, Imaging 2009, 9:17 [http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2342-9-17].
139. Ystad MA, Eichele T, Lundervold AJ, Lundervold A: Subcortical functional
connectivity and verbal episodic memory in healthy elderly - a resting
state fMRI study. Neuroimage 2010.
140. Minka T: Automatic choice of dimensionality for PCA. Tech. Rep. Technical
Report 514, MIT Media Laboratory, Vision and Modeling Group 2000.
141. Babiloni C, Sara M, Vecchio F, Pistoia F, Sebastiano F, Onorati P, Albertini G,
Pasqualetti P, Cibelli G, Buffo P, Rossini PM: Cortical sources of resting-
state alpha rhythms are abnormal in persistent vegetative state patients.
Clin Neurophysiol 2009, 120(4):719-729.
142. Boly M, Phillips C, Tshibanda L, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Schabus M, Dang-Vu TT,
Moonen G, Hustinx R, Maquet P, Laureys S: Intrinsic brain activity in
altered states of consciousness: how conscious is the default mode of
brain function? Ann N Y Acad Sci 2008, 1129:119-129.
143. Boly M, Phillips C, Balteau E, Schnakers C, Degueldre C, Moonen G, Luxen A,
Peigneux P, Faymonville ME, Maquet P, Laureys S: Consciousness and
cerebral baseline activity fluctuations. Hum Brain Mapp 2008,
29(7):868-874.
144. Boly M, Massimini M, Tononi G: Theoretical approaches to the diagnosis
of altered states of consciousness. Prog Brain Res 2009, 177:383-398.
145. Cauda F, Micon BM, Sacco K, Duca S, D’Agata F, Geminiani G, Canavero S:
Disrupted intrinsic functional connectivity in the vegetative state. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2009, 80(4):429-431.
146. van Gaal S, Ridderinkhof KR, Scholte HS, Lamme VAF: Unconscious
activation of the prefrontal no-go network. J Neurosci 2010,
30(11):4143-4150.
147. Ghosh A, Rho Y, McIntosh AR, Kotter R, Jirsa VK: Noise during rest enables
the exploration of the brain’s dynamic repertoire. PLoS Comput Biol
2008, 4(10):e1000196.
148. Greicius MD, Kiviniemi V, Tervonen O, Vainionpäö V, Alahuhta S, Reiss AL,
Menon V: Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light
sedation. Hum Brain Mapp 2008, 29(7):839-847.
149. Johnston JM, Vaishnavi SN, Smyth MD, Zhang D, He BJ, Zempel JM,
Shimony JS, Snyder AZ, Raichle ME: Loss of resting interhemispheric
functional connectivity after complete section of the corpus callosum. J
Neurosci 2008, 28(25):6453-6458.
150. Morgan VL, Gore JC, Szaflarski JP: Temporal clustering analysis: what does
it tell us about the resting state of the brain? Med Sci Monit 2008, 14(7):
CR345-CR352.
151. Treserras S, Boulanouar K, Conchou F, Simonetta-Moreau M, Berry I, Celsis P,
Chollet F, Loubinoux I: Transition from rest to movement: brain correlates
revealed by functional connectivity. Neuroimage 2009, 48:207-216.
152. Tshibanda L, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Boly M, Soddu A, Bruno MA, Moonen G,
Laureys S, Noirhomme Q: Neuroimaging after coma. Neuroradiology 2010,
52:15-24.
153. Vincent JL, Patel GH, Fox MD, Snyder AZ, Baker JT, Essen DCV, Zempel JM,
Snyder LH, Corbetta M, Raichle ME: Intrinsic functional architecture in the
anaesthetized monkey brain. Nature 2007, 447(7140):83-86.
154. Pons AJ, Cantero JL, Atienza M, Garcia-Ojalvo J: Relating structural and
functional anomalous connectivity in the aging brain via neural mass
modeling. Neuroimage 2010.
155. Roebroeck A, Formisano E, Geobel R: The identification of interacting
networks in the brain using fMRI: Model selection, causality and
deconvolution. Neuroimage 2010.
156. Rubinov M, Sporns O, van Leeuwen C, Breakspear M: Symbiotic relationship
between brain structure and dynamics. BMC Neurosci 2009, 10:55.
157. Spiegler A, Kiebel SJ, Atay FM, Knosche TR: Bifurcation analysis of neural
mass models: Impact of extrinsic inputs and dendritic time constants.
Neuroimage 2009 [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.081].
158. Thirion B, Dodel S, Poline JB: Detection of signal synchronizations in
resting-state fMRI datasets. Neuroimage 2006, 29:321-327.
159. Michel CM, Koenig T, Brandeis D, Gianotti LR, Wackermann J (Eds): Electrical
Neuroimaging. Cambridge University Press 2009.
160. Englot DJ, Blumenfeld H: Consciousness and epilepsy: why are complex-
partial seizures complex? Prog Brain Res 2009, 177:147-170.
161. Hauge T, Løken AC, Lundervold A: Unusual EEG in unconscious patient
with brain stem atrophy. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1956,
8(4):665-670.
162. Pockett S, Holmes MD: Intracranial EEG power spectra and phase
synchrony during consciousness and unconsciousness. Conscious Cogn
2009, 18(4):1049-1055.
163. Babiloni C, Vecchio F, Buffo P, Buttiglione M, Cibelli G, Rossini PM: Cortical
responses to consciousness of schematic emotional facial expressions: A
high-resolution EEG study. Hum Brain Mapp 2010.
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 16 of 18

164. Kostopoulos GK: Involvement of the thalamocortical system in epileptic
loss of consciousness. Epilepsia 2001, 42(Suppl 3):13-19.
165. Deneux T, Faugeras O: EEG-fMRI fusion of paradigm-free activity using
Kalman filtering. Neural Comput 2010, 22(4):906-948.
166. Eichele T, Calhoun VD, Moosmann M, Specht K, Jongsma MLA, Quiroga RQ,
Nordby H, Hugdahl K: Unmixing concurrent EEG-fMRI with parallel
independent component analysis. Int J Psychophysiol 2008, 67(3):222-234.
167. Esposito F, Aragri A, Piccoli T, Tedeschi G, Goebel R, Salle FD: Distributed
analysis of simultaneous EEG-fMRI time-series: modeling and
interpretation issues. Magn Reson Imaging 2009, 27(8):1120-1130.
168. Esposito F, Mulert C, Goebel R: Combined distributed source and single-
trial EEG-fMRI modeling: application to effortful decision making
processes. Neuroimage 2009, 47:112-121.
169. Li Q, Luo C, Yang T, Yao Z, He L, Liu L, Xu H, Gong Q, Yao D, Zhou D: EEG-
fMRI study on the interictal and ictal generalized spike-wave discharges
in patients with childhood absence epilepsy. Epilepsy Res 2009, 87(2-
3):160-168.
170. Lei X, Qiu C, Xu P, Yao D: A parallel framework for simultaneous EEG/fMRI
analysis: Methodology and simulation. Neuroimage 2010 [http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.01.024].
171. Mantini D, Perrucci MG, Gratta CD, Romani GL, Corbetta M:
Electrophysiological signatures of resting state networks in the human
brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007, 104(32):13170-13175.
172. Martino FD, Valente G, de Borst AW, Esposito F, Roebroeck A, Goebel R,
Formisano E: Multimodal imaging: an evaluation of univariate and
multivariate methods for simultaneous EEG/fMRI. Magn Reson Imaging
2010.
173. Moosmann M, Schonfelder VH, Specht K, Scheeringa R, Nordby H,
Hugdahl K: Realignment parameter-informed artefact correction for
simultaneous EEG-fMRI recordings. Neuroimage 2009, 45(4):1144-1150.
174. Mulert C, Leicht G, Hepp P, Kirsch V, Karch S, Pogarell O, Reiser M, Hegerl U,
Jöger L, Moller HJ, McCarley RW: Single-trial coupling of the gamma-band
response and the corresponding BOLD signal. Neuroimage 2010,
49(3):2238-2247.
175. Ritter P, Moosmann M, Villringer A: Rolandic alpha and beta EEG rhythms’
strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD signal in primary
somatosensory and motor cortex. Hum Brain Mapp 2009,
30(4):1168-1187.
176. Rodionov R, Siniatchkin M, Michel CM, Liston AD, Thornton R, Guye M,
Carmichael DW, Lemieux L: Looking for neuronal currents using MRI: an
EEG-fMRI investigation of fast MR signal changes time-locked to
frequent focal epileptic discharges. Neuroimage 2010, 50(3):1109-1117.
177. Sato JR, Rondinoni C, Sturzbecher M, de Araujo DB, Amaro E: From EEG to
BOLD: brain mapping and estimating transfer functions in simultaneous
EEG-fMRI acquisitions. Neuroimage 2010, 50(4):1416-1426.
178. Musso F, Brinkmeyer J, Mobascher A, Warbrick T, Winterer G: Spontaneous
brain activity and EEG microstates. A novel EEG/fMRI analysis approach
to explore resting-state networks. Neuroimage 2010.
179. Bodurka J, Bandettini PA: Toward direct mapping of neuronal activity:
MRI detection of ultraweak, transient magnetic field changes. Magn
Reson Med 2002, 47(6):1052-1058.
180. Heller L, Barrowes BE, George JS: Modeling direct effects of neural current
on MRI. Hum Brain Mapp 2009, 30:1-12.
181. Paley MNJ, Chow LS, Whitby EH, Cook GG: Modelling of axonal fields in
the optic nerve for direct MR detection studies. Image and Vision
Computing 2009, 27:331-341 [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.imavis.2008.05.001].
182. Parkes LM, de Lange FP, Fries P, Toni I, Norris DG: Inability to directly
detect magnetic field changes associated with neuronal activity. Magn
Reson Med 2007, 57(2):411-416.
183. Friston KJ: Modalities, modes, and models in functional neuroimaging.
Science 2009, 326(5951):399-403.
184. Lagercrantz H, Changeux JP: The emergence of human consciousness:
from fetal to neonatal life. Pediatr Res 2009, 65(3):255-260.
185. Merker B: Consciousness without a cerebral cortex: a challenge for
neuroscience and medicine. Behav Brain Sci 2007, 30:63-81, discussion 81-134.
186. Lewin R: Is your brain really necessary? Science 1980,
210(4475):1232-1234.
187. Faber J, Portugal R, Rosa LP: Information processing in brain
microtubules. Biosystems 2006, 83:1-9.
188. Frohlich S, Franco CA: The consciousness circuit - an approach to the
hard problem. Adv Exp Med Biol 2010, 657:285-301.
189. Hagan S, Hameroff SR, Tuszyński JA: Quantum computation in brain
microtubules: decoherence and biological feasibility. Phys Rev E Stat
Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 2002, 65(6 Pt 1):061901.
190. Hameroff S: Quantum computation in brain microtubules? The Penrose-
Hameroff ‘Orch OR’ model of consciousness. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A
1998, 356:1869-1896.
191. Musha T: Possibility of high performance quantum computation by
superluminal evanescent photons in living systems. Biosystems 2009,
96(3):242-245.
192. Penrose R: Shadows of the Mind. Oxford University Press 1994.
193. Penrose R: Consciousness, the brain, and spacetime geometry: an
addendum. Some new developments on the Orch OR model for
consciousness. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2001, 929:105-110.
194. Woolf NJ, Hameroff SR: A quantum approach to visual consciousness.
Trends Cogn Sci 2001, 5(11):472-478.
195. Craddock TJA, Tuszynski JA: A critical assessment of the information
processing capabilities of neuronal microtubules using coherent
excitations. J Biol Phys 2010, 36:53-70.
196. McKemmish LK, Reimers JR, McKenzie RH, Mark AE, Hush NS: Penrose-
Hameroff orchestrated objective-reduction proposal for human
consciousness is not biologically feasible. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft
Matter Phys 2009, 80(2 Pt 1):021912.
197. Tegmark M: Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes.
Phys Rev E Stat Phys Plasmas Fluids Relat Interdiscip Topics 2000, 61(4 Pt
B):4194-4206.
198. Kiebel SJ, Daunizeau J, Friston KJ: A hierarchy of time-scales and the
brain. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4(11):e1000209.
199. Kiebel SJ, von Kriegstein K, Daunizeau J, Friston KJ: Recognizing sequences
of sequences. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5(8):e1000464.
200. Haider B, McCormick DA: Rapid neocortical dynamics: cellular and
network mechanisms. Neuron 2009, 62(2):171-189.
201. Kiebel SJ, Daunizeau J, Friston KJ: Perception and hierarchical dynamics.
Front Neuroinformatics 2009, 3:20.
202. Angenstein F, Kammerer E, Scheich H: The BOLD response in the rat
hippocampus depends rather on local processing of signals than on the
input or output activity. A combined functional MRI and
electrophysiological study. J Neurosci 2009, 29(8):2428-2439.
203. Angenstein F, Krautwald K, Scheich H: The current functional state of local
neuronal circuits controls the magnitude of a BOLD response to
incoming stimuli. Neuroimage 2010, 50(4):1364-1375.
204. Adams RB, Rule NO, Franklin RG, Wang E, Stevenson MT, Yoshikawa S,
Nomura M, Sato W, Kveraga K, Ambady N: Cross-cultural reading the mind
in the eyes: An fMRI investigation. J Cogn Neurosci 2009, 22:97-108
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2009.21187].
205. deCharms RC: Applications of real-time fMRI. Nat Rev Neurosci 2008,
9(9):720-729.
206. Hanson SJ, Halchenko YO: Brain reading using full brain support vector
machines for object recognition: there is no “face” identification area.
Neural Comput 2008, 20(2):486-503.
207. Haynes JD, Rees G: Decoding mental states from brain activity in
humans. Nat Rev Neurosci 2006, 7(7):523-534.
208. Kinsbourne M: From unilateral neglect to the brain basis of
consciousness. Cortex 2006, 42(6):869-874.
209. Cicek M, Deouell LY, Knight RT: Brain activity during landmark and line
bisection tasks. Front Hum Neurosci 2009, 3:7.
210. Ruff CC, Blankenburg F, Bjoertomt O, Bestmann S, Weiskopf N, Driver J:
Hemispheric differences in frontal and parietal influences on human
occipital cortex: direct confirmation with concurrent TMS-fMRI. J Cogn
Neurosci 2009, 21(6):1146-1161.
211. Bernat JL: Chronic consciousness disorders. Annu Rev Med 2009, 60:381-392.
212. Christensen MS, Ramsøy TZ, Lund TE, Madsen KH, Rowe JB: An fMRI study
of the neural correlates of graded visual perception. Neuroimage 2006,
31(4):1711-1725.
213. Davis MH, Coleman MR, Absalom AR, Rodd JM, Johnsrude IS, Matta BF,
Owen AM, Menon DK: Dissociating speech perception and
comprehension at reduced levels of awareness. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104(41):16032-16037.
214. Horovitz SG, Fukunaga M, de Zwart JA, van Gelderen P, Fulton SC, Balkin TJ,
Duyn JH: Low frequency BOLD fluctuations during resting wakefulness
and light sleep: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study. Hum Brain Mapp 2008,
29(6):671-682.
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 17 of 18

215. Laureys S: Eyes open, brain shut. Sci Am 2007, 296(5):84-89.
216. Overgaard M: How can we know if patients in coma, vegetative state or
minimally conscious state are conscious? Prog Brain Res 2009, 177:11-19.
217. Owen AM, Coleman MR, Boly M, Davis MH, Laureys S, Pickard JD: Detecting
awareness in the vegetative state. Science 2006, 313(5792):1402.
218. Owen AM, Coleman MR: Functional MRI in disorders of consciousness:
advantages and limitations. Curr Opin Neurol 2007, 20(6):632-637.
219. Pagnoni G, Cekic M, Guo Y: ‘’Thinking about not-thinking": neural
correlates of conceptual processing during Zen meditation. PLoS One
2008, 3(9):e3083.
220. Bien N, Roebroeck A, Goebel R, Sack AT: The brain’s intention to imitate:
the neurobiology of intentional versus automatic imitation. Cereb Cortex
2009, 19(10):2338-2351.
doi:10.1186/1753-4631-4-S1-S9
Cite this article as: Lundervold: On consciousness, resting state fMRI,
and neurodynamics. Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010 4(Suppl 1):S9.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Lundervold Nonlinear Biomedical Physics 2010, 4(Suppl 1):S9
http://www.nonlinearbiomedphys.com/content/4/S1/S9
Page 18 of 18
