HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 27 August 2015
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01204
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204
Edited by:
Nathan Faivre,
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne, Switzerland
Reviewed by:
Giorgio Marchetti,
Mind, Consciousness, and Language
Research Net, Italy
Travis Craddock,
Nova Southeastern University, USA
*Correspondence:
Ravinder Jerath,
Augusta Women’s Center, 2100
Central Ave., Suite #7, Augusta,
GA 30904, USA
rj605r@aol.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Consciousness Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 18 March 2015
Accepted: 29 July 2015
Published: 27 August 2015
Citation:
Jerath R, Crawford MW and Barnes
VA (2015) A uniﬁed 3D default space
consciousness model combining
neurological and physiological
processes that underlie conscious
experience. Front. Psychol. 6:1204.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01204
A uniﬁed 3D default space
consciousness model combining
neurological and physiological
processes that underlie conscious
experience
Ravinder Jerath 1*, Molly W. Crawford 1 and Vernon A. Barnes 2
1 Augusta Women’s Center, Augusta, GA, USA, 2 Department of Pediatrics, Georgia Prevention Institute, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA, USA
The Global Workspace Theory and Information Integration Theory are two of the most
currently accepted consciousness models; however, these models do not address many
aspects of conscious experience. We compare these models to our previously proposed
consciousness model in which the thalamus ﬁlls-in processed sensory information from
corticothalamic feedback loops within a proposed 3D default space, resulting in the
recreation of the internal and external worlds within the mind. This 3D default space
is composed of all cells of the body, which communicate via gap junctions and electrical
potentials to create this uniﬁed space. We use 3D illustrations to explain how both visual
and non-visual sensory information may be ﬁlled-in within this dynamic space, creating
a uniﬁed seamless conscious experience. This neural sensory memory space is likely
generated by baseline neural oscillatory activity from the default mode network, other
salient networks, brainstem, and reticular activating system.
Keywords: consciousness, 3D default space, sensory memory space, global workspace theory, integrated
information theory, thalamus, corticothalamic feedback loops, meditation
Introduction
The mystery of how consciousness arises is one of the biggest unanswered questions in science.
Two properties of consciousness cause diﬃculty in elucidating its underlying mechanisms:
consciousness consists of a ﬁrst person experience which a third person cannot directly access and
consciousness is an emergent property of a neural system which does not exist in its individual
parts (Lehmann, 2013). These problematic properties of consciousness have necessitated many
diﬀerent hypotheses regarding how the brain works as the mind. Our model, like many other
models, emphasizes the important role of corticothalamic feedback loops in consciousness and
stresses the important involvement of the entire body in conscious experience. The neural aspect
of our proposed consciousness model is similar to many currently accepted consciousness models,
such as the Global Workspace Theory but has some key diﬀerences. We discuss evidence from
physiology, anatomy, dynamic peripheral and central nervous system oscillations, homeostasis,
psychology, neurophysiology, and evolution. We have recently published various aspects of
this comprehensive hypothesis, including human physiology, neurophysiology, and mind-body
response in theoretical articles that detail novel mechanisms that may underlie consciousness

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
and various disorders such as contralateral neglect syndrome,
motion sickness, claustrophobia, (Jerath and Crawford, 2014),
phantom limb syndrome (Jerath et al., 2015b), anxiety (Jerath and
Crawford, 2015a; Jerath et al., 2015a), and various other medical
conditions and neural processes (Jerath and Crawford, 2015b). In
this paper, we expand on our previously proposed consciousness
model to include discussion on the issues of memory, internal
imagery, emotions, meditation, sleep, and other topics. Our
model also oﬀers insights into various levels of consciousness
such as coma, slow-wave sleep, REM and dream sleep, awake
states, and higher consciousness states. Further reﬁnement of this
model has the potential to elucidate a causative mechanism that
leads the self into normal and abnormal psychological states and
underlies consciousness.
Previously Proposed Models of
Consciousness
Some have proposed that sensory consciousness emerged
when early mammals or mammal-like reptiles evolved larger
thalamocortical networks (Tononi and Edelman, 2000). It has
also been proposed that it is likely that sensory consciousness
evolved long before what we think of as conscious human
experience and thought. In addition, the unique experience of
human consciousness likely involved the development of the
ability for voluntary control of these pre-human consciousness
processes (Baars, 2003). When examining consciousness in
other species it is useful to use human consciousness as a
reference (Edelman et al., 2005). In addition, the wealth of
studies indicating that the thalamocortical system is involved
in the generation of consciousness suggests that we should
search for homologous structures in non-mammalian species
(Edelman et al., 2005). However, this is not always the best
approach. For example, studies have shown that the hippocampal
formation performs similar functions in mammals and birds
but diﬀers vastly in anatomy and physiology (Striedter, 2002).
It has been proposed that mammalian consciousness emerged
when reentrant connectivity between brain areas evolved
(Edelman, 2004). But this raises questions regarding “intelligent”
invertebrates, such as cephalopods, that demonstrate learning
and awareness. Reentrant connectivity, such as that exhibited by
corticothalamic feedback loops in mammalian brains, has not
been observed in cephalopods but some possible homologous
structures have been identiﬁed (Edelman, 2004). The many
studies that demonstrate the learning and behavioral abilities of
octopi suggest that they exhibit sensory consciousness; however,
whether this consciousness arises via a reentrant mechanism
similar to that of mammalian brains or whether it arises via a
diﬀerent mechanism is still up for debate and requires further
study. A useful distinction that Edelman makes is deﬁning
primary or sensory consciousness which consists of the creation
of a neural multimodal scene and higher-order consciousness
which involves the same aspects of primary consciousness, with
the addition of a frame of reference that can “access” the past,
present, and future, a sense of self, and the ability to construct past
and future representations (Edelman, 2004). Current theories
of consciousness have yet to answer what David Chalmers has
termed the “hard problems” of consciousness of how the brain
produces subjective experience from sensory signals (Chalmers,
1995), such as how the brain experiences what water feels
like or the taste and texture of an orange. This is due to the
subjective rather than objective nature of these experiences,
hence the diﬃculty in studying and unraveling this phenomenon.
Currently, there are two consciousness models that are regarded
as the most current leading theories on consciousness processes:
the Global Workspace Theory and the Integrated Information
Theory.
Bernard Baars developed the Global Workspace Theory
(GW), which he and other researchers have further developed
over the years. The simplest explanation of the GW Theory
is with a theater metaphor. In this model, consciousness is
the bright spotlight on a stage and the surrounding dark
theater is the unconscious (Baars, 2005). This model should
not be confused with a “Cartesian theater” model in which
the self is an entity observing what is in the spotlight;
rather the self is the spotlight itself. This model involves a
momentary working memory consisting of a few seconds of
active and dynamic subjective experience (Baars, 1997). This
working memory includes inner speech, visual imagery, and
“the narrative of our lives” (Baars, 1997). According to this
model, consciousness arises from interactive but independent
hubs throughout the brain. These streams of unconscious
parallel processing have limited interaction and “compete” for
propagation. This functions by a “winner-take-all” mechanism in
which multiple streams settle on a single stream for binding and
propagation (Baars et al., 2013).
Rather than addressing the “hard problems” of consciousness
directly, Tononi has proposed a consciousness model known
as the Integrated Information Theory (Tononi, 2008) which
examines consciousness itself in order to create a framework
to better understand consciousness process es that give rise
to the phenomenon of subjective experience. The theory
consists of various basic tenants such as that conscious
experience consists of the integration of large amounts of
information; and this information is irreducible in complexity.
According to Tononi, consciousness is integrated information.
Although the integration of information is an important
aspect of consciousness, consciousness should not be equated
simply to integrated information. In Tononi’s model, processed
information from sensory systems and cognitive processes is
integrated into a seamless conscious experience. In this model,
the degree of irreducibility is known as phi. They propose that if
phi is 0 for a system then that system is reducible, whereas phi
must be a large number for a system to be conscious (Tononi,
2004, 2008). Tononi also proposes a “qualia space” in which the
informational relationships between the various axis within this
space give rise to speciﬁc experiences (Tononi, 2008).
Trehub proposes a Retinoid Model in which a retinoid system
integrates separate foveal images to create a 3D space within
the brain (Trehub, 2007). This retinoid system is composed
of re-stimulating autaptic neurons. The separate 2D retinal
images are projected on retinoid arrays to create a seamless 3D
image (Trehub, 2007). He also proposes that this system also
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
applies to the projection of non-visual information such as the
representation of the body within egocentric space. This is a very
important model in demonstrating how 3D visual images and
non-visual representations within the mind may be produced
but it does not address many issues, including the speciﬁc brain
areas involved in consciousness or the extensive processing of
retinal images that occurs throughout the brain. For example, at
what point in visual processing does this 3D projection occur and
at what point does this projection rise to conscious awareness?
We propose that the projection of 3D space is processed by the
thalamus after extensive processing throughout the cortex. We
propose that this projection/ﬁlling-in of 3D default space from
2D retinal images may occur via a mechanism similar to Trehub’s
retinoid model but further studies need to be done to elucidate
this and other possible neuronal mechanisms. Our consciousness
model integrates important elements of these currently accepted
consciousness models to create a model that addresses conscious
experience and the important but overlooked roles of the
thalamus, resting state networks, respiration, and the role of slow
and fast oscillations from throughout the body.
Merker’s proposals regarding consciousness emphasize that
what we experience is more of a derivative of the actual stimuli
than what is commonly thought and what we experience is an
interpretation of a stimulus (Merker, 2013), which is similar to
the tenets of our proposed model. Merker also proposes that
nothing is added to content in order for it to rise to conscious
awareness; rather, this content is formatted so that it can provide
the best estimate of a stimulus within a very short amount of
time. For example, in vision this content must be formatted
within minute inter-saccadic intervals (Merker, 2012). In the
past Merker had proposed that the upper brainstem may be
the medium for conscious function (Merker, 2007) but more
recently he has discussed the possible role of thalamic nuclei in
implementing a “global best estimate buﬀer” and implementing
perspective and an ego-center for interactions with the body and
external world (Merker, 2012). The brainstem plays an important
role in our consciousness model and we propose that oscillatory
activity from the brainstem may be involved in the idling neural
activity that forms the neural sensory memory space. Therefore,
our model and Merker’s proposals have cross-over in terms of
processing of content but we have proposed a more speciﬁc and
global model that further deﬁnes neural correlates, the properties
and interactions of our deﬁned neural and body spaces and
further deﬁnes the framework of consciousness processing and
the thalamus as the central primary hub for consciousness.
Our model shares some similarities to Damasio’s model in
regards to internal representations of visual and non-visual
sensory information and emotions. In addition, Damasio’s
model proposes a proto-self which is “a coherent collection of
neural patterns which constantly map, moment by moment,
the state of the physical structure of the organism in its many
dimensions,”(Damasio, 1999) which is similar to our concept of
3D default space. However, Damasio’s model focuses primarily
on emotion aspects of consciousness and does not address neural
correlates beyond well-established emotion centers of the brain.
Min proposes a thalamic reticular network model of
consciousness and emphasizes the role of the thalamic reticular
nucleus in attention (Min, 2010). Our model proposes this as
well but emphasizes the role of the entire dorsal thalamus,
as well as the thalamic reticular nuclei. In addition, Min’s
model does not deﬁne processes or properties of consciousness
beyond the proposal of the possible involvement of the thalamic
reticular nucleus. We describe a more global consciousness
model involving the framework of a neural sensory memory
space that is ﬁlled in with processed information by the thalamus.
Although the GW Theory and Integrated Information Theory
do emphasize the important and essential role of corticothalamic
feedback loops they do not recognize the importance of the
thalamus and instead conﬁne the hubs of conscious experience to
the cortex. The evolutionary expansion of the forebrain that has
resulted in the current mammalian cerebral cortex has allowed
for elaboration and increased complexity of conscious content
(Merker, 2007); however, areas of the brain such as the thalamus
and brainstem are essential for consciousness while the cortex
is not. For example, mammals have been shown to exhibit goal
seeking behavior after decortiﬁcation and decorticate rats do
not show any obvious impairments upon casual observation
(Whishaw, 1990). Evidence has shown that children born without
a cerebral cortex exhibit discriminative awareness (Shewmon
et al., 1999) and in the past, large areas of the cortex have been
removed in patients to treat severe epilepsy (Pendﬁeld and Jasper,
1954); resulting in loss of information and abilities but not a
loss of consciousness or “continuity of consciousness” (Merker,
2007). Though, the neocortex plays an important role in the
ability to perform complex processing, the neocortex has been
proposed to not be essential for consciousness (Low, 2012). Most
studies examining the neural correlates of consciousness fall into
one of two categories: content-based and state-based. Content–
based approaches compare conscious perception of diﬀerent
types of content while state-based studies compare diﬀerent
conscious states, such as sleep and awake states (Hohwy, 2009).
Both approaches have drawbacks on their own so combining
the two approaches may improve consciousness studies. Many
theories, including ours, combine both conscious content and
states (Baars, 1997; Tononi, 2004; Jerath and Crawford, 2014).
It has been proposed that these two separate approaches should
be integrated into a new approach that addresses the interplay
between content and state (Hohwy, 2009). We believe that our
model is successful in doing this, though experimental evidence
is required to further support and elucidate our model.
3D Default Space Theory
Sensory information is converted into electrical signals at
the sensory end organ which is then integrated and ﬁlled-
in within the 3D default space. We propose that the outside
world is recreated internally in a format that is optimal for
interacting with and responding to the external environment.
However, both attention processes and memory contribute to the
ﬁnal representation within and experience of conscious events.
Processed external and internal stimuli are recreated within this
dynamic and active sensory memory space in which current
conscious experience, dreaming, and recollection of memories
takes place. Our consciousness model includes components from
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
the GW theory such as the important role of corticothalamic
processing. However, in our model, corticothalamic feedback
loops process sensory information from throughout the body and
this information is then integrated by the thalamus and ﬁlled in
to the 3D default space (Jerath and Crawford, 2014) (Figure 1).
We propose that conscious experience arises when this space
is ﬁlled in by input from the thalamus, as opposed to the GW
theory in which consciousness can arise anywhere throughout
the cortex. This 3D default space is home to a neural global
workplace in which external space is represented internally
(Figure 2). The human body consists of intrapersonal space
that is composed of all the interconnected cells of the body,
which are all connected and communicate via gap junctions
and electrical potentials (Saez et al., 2003); we have termed
this the 3D default space. It is only when the thalamus
receives processed sensory information from the cortex that it
integrates and ﬁlls in this information within this space. We
propose that the sensory memory space (a neural component
of 3D default space) may be formed by oscillations from the
default mode network, resting state networks, reticular activating
system, and possibly other networks. The thalamus (including
the reticular thalamic nucleus) ﬁlls in this space with visual
and non-visual representations using integrated and processed
sensory information. This step is essential for consciousness to
emerge. Therefore, the ﬁlling-in of this space and the emergence
of consciousness occur simultaneously but the neural space
FIGURE 1 | Internal processing pathways of external visual and
non-visual space. (A) Projection of image on retina, (B)
Corticothalamic feedback loops, (C) Visual and non-visual space. This
ﬁgure depicts simpliﬁed processing pathways of visual and other
sensory space. Light entering the eye forms an inverted image of the
external visual space on the retina. This visual information passes
through the optic nerve, through the lateral geniculate body, and other
areas of the thalamus, to the occipital lobe, the parietal lobe, and then
back to the thalamus. This processed information is then further
processed in the frontal lobe and prefrontal cortex and back to the
thalamus. This processed visual information becomes conscious when it
is integrated and reimaged by the thalamus in the default 3D space.
All this processing occurs in fractions of a second, so the viewer does
not notice that what they are “seeing” is a processed image within
their minds, rather than the actual external space. In addition to
processed visual information, this default 3D space is also formed via
afferent spatial/sensory input from the body. This information is involved
in feedback loops between the thalamus and parietal lobe and the
thalamus and frontal lobe. The thalamus integrates this processed
non-visual information and forms the 3D body space within the mind.
This processed information rises to conscious awareness after
processing throughout the cortex and integration by the thalamus.
(Figure and ﬁgure description reproduced with permission from
copyright holder. Figure by Lynsey Ekema, MSMI).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
FIGURE 2 | Correlation of external and internal space. (A) Lateral view
of 3D default space, (B) Posterior view of 3D default space, (C) 3D default
space. An important aspect of consciousness is the processing of sensory
information. This ﬁgure aims to show the processing of visual sensory
information and the default 3D space created in the mind. The area
surrounding the ﬁgure represents the external visual space and the black
surrounding area represents external non-visual space. The global visual ﬁeld
is surrounded by this dark shading to illustrate where the ﬁgure’s visual ﬁeld
ends. This external visual space is seen by the eyes, processed by the brain,
and an internal visual representation of external visual space is imaged within
the mind, along with non-visual space. We refer to this reproduction of visual
and non-visual space as the 3D default space. Note that this representation
of the internal representation of external visual space illustrates this
phenomenon and is not meant to indicate any anatomical landmarks in the
brain. The outline of the ﬁgure is also surrounded by dark shading to show
where internal space ends and reﬂects how the external non-visible space is
mirrored functionally within the internal non-visible space. The brain is
constantly receiving internal information from throughout the body and
external information via the sensory systems that contribute to the formation
of consciousness, a sense of self, and a 3D default space consisting of
integrated and reprojected internal and external space The external visual
and non-visual world appears separate from our internal world due to the
high speed processing of corticothalamic information. This illusion allows the
brain to function as the mind in a seemingly seamless reality. (Figure and
ﬁgure description reproduced with permission from copyright holder. Figure
by Lynsey Ekema, MSMI).
or framework, which is ﬁlled in with processed information,
is already formed by “idling” neural oscillatory activity. 3D
default space consists of the entire brain and body and all the
communicating cells within. This 3D default space also includes
a neural component consisting of a neural sensory memory space
which is ﬁlled in by both visual and non-visual processed sensory
information. We propose that thalamus acts as an internal engine
of awareness and is the primary hub for consciousness, though
obviously many areas are involved and act as secondary or
tertiary hubs. The thalamus coordinates, integrates, and orients
sensory information in order for it to rise to conscious awareness.
All sensations seem to arise from outside our mind but this
is an illusion inherent in the processing in the mind that helps
us to quickly and eﬃciently interact with the outside world.
For example, vision is perceived at the end organ and appears
external to ourselves but what we actually perceive is processed
visual information that has been recreated within the mind. In
our model, we emphasize the important role of the mind-body
connection in consciousness. Conscious experience arises in the
mind from processed information from throughout the body and
feedback from the body inﬂuences neural activity.
The thalamus is involved in attention and processing
of interoceptive and self-referential activity, in addition to
exteroceptive activity (Farb et al., 2013) therefore, the removal
of the thalamus would likely result in loss of consciousness.
Following thalamotomy, an invasive procedure performed to
treat tremors in Parkinson’s patients, only small portion of the
thalamus is destroyed but this can lead to complications in vision
and speech (Bruce et al., 2004), especially following bilateral
procedures. Following thalamic infarct, distinct syndromes and
dysfunctions arise dependent on the thalamic areas aﬀected (Del
Mar Sáez De Ocariz et al., 1996). For example, patients can
experience memory impairment, sensory motor-dysfunctions,
speech disturbances, amnesia, and many other cognitive and/or
consciousness disorders. Compared to infarcts in other thalamic
areas, hemorrhages, and paramedian thalamic infarcts lead to
altered states of consciousness including coma, periods of stupor
(Del Mar Sáez De Ocariz et al., 1996), or decreased arousal
(Schmahmann, 2003). In addition, central thalamic deep brain
stimulation may be used to restore consciousness and cognitive
function in coma and vegetative state patients; however, further
study of this as a possible successful treatment is needed
(Shah and Schiﬀ, 2010). There is a lack of literature regarding
the experimental removal of the entire thalami therefore, the
eﬀects of such a procedure can only be inferred; however,
because certain thalamic lesions can cause unconsciousness,
removal of the entire thalamus would also result in a loss of
consciousness. Bilateral thalamic tumors are rare but when they
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
occur surgical removal of the tumor is considered inoperable
(Di Rocco and Iannelli, 2002). Surgery is performed only to
perform a biopsy on the tumor and prognosis is poor with
only 7.6% of patients surviving more than 12 months (Gelabert-
González et al., 2007). Symptoms include high incidences of
mental impairment, increased intracranial pressure (Gelabert-
González et al., 2007), tremors (Di Rocco and Iannelli, 2002),
memory, motor, and sensory dysfunction, personality changes
(Rajput et al., 2010), and other dysfunctions depending on the
thalamic nuclei aﬀected. Even bithalamic gliomas, which are
generally benign, have a poor prognosis due to the involvement
of thalamic nuclei and very limited surgical options (Rajput et al.,
2010). Attempts to remove even small portions of these tumors
can lead to severe complications including unconsciousness,
coma, and overall deterioration (Rajput et al., 2010). Injury to
the thalamus is associated with severe impairment of functional
integration, regulation of arousal (Schiﬀ, 2008), and deﬁcits
in executive function, memory, and attention (Van Der Werf
et al., 2003). Unilateral lesions of the thalamus can result in
hemispatial unawareness (Heilman et al., 1987) and altered
states of consciousness such as manic delirium (Bogousslavsky
et al., 1988). Thalamic infarct can also lead to widespread
decrease in cerebral metabolism of the ipsilateral hemisphere
(Szelies et al., 1991) due to synaptic downregulation of distant
neurons connected to the thalamus (Nguyen and Botez, 1998).
Lesions in the anterior thalamic nuclei cause severe spatial
deﬁcits and disrupt various types of spatial and nonspatial
learning, indicating the important role of the anterior thalamic
nucleus in spatial and memory processing systems (Aggleton
and Nelson, 2014). Focal injuries to the thalamus can also lead
to epileptic seizures (Van Domburg et al., 1996) and exhibit
similar symptoms to catatonia and dystonia (Schiﬀ, 2005). It has
also been found that the loss of the integrity of the thalamus
in traumatic brain injuries underlies subsequent dysfunction
in executive function, memory, and attention (Little et al.,
2010). In the same study, reductions in fractional anisotropy
in corticocortical and corpus collosum areas of the brain
did not account for signiﬁcant reductions or impairment in
neurophysiological function (Little et al., 2010). This study
demonstrates the important role of the thalamus in executive
function when compared to the role of cortex and corpus
collosum. The thalamus has also been found to be an essential
component of emotion and cognitive processing (Wojtecki et al.,
2014). A large study on disorders of consciousness examined the
links between thalamic mechanisms with willful behavior and
found that levels of arousal and wakefulness were associated with
atrophy of the thalamus and basal ganglia (Lutkenhoﬀet al.,
2015).
It is widely known that the thalamus functions as a relay
of sensory information to the cortex but other thalamic roles
are not as well-understood. For example, the thalamus is also
involved in basic corticocortical communication. The lateral
geniculate nucleus acts as a ﬁrst order relay while nuclei such
as the pulvinar and medial dorsal nucleus act as a higher
order relays that transmit information from layer 5 of the
cortex to other cortical areas (Sherman, 2005). In addition,
overall there are signiﬁcantly more higher order relay nuclei
than ﬁrst order relays (Sherman and Guillery, 2001). These
studies demonstrate the central role of the thalamus in cortical
functioning and the ﬂow of information. It has even been
proposed that corticocortical connections may act as modulators
while the majority of information is sent between cortical
areas by higher order thalamic relays (Sherman, 2005). In
addition, thalamic neurons are physiologically and anatomically
specialized to support and maintain widespread network activity
and neuronal ﬁring patterns within corticocortical networks and
thalamocortical feedback loops (Schiﬀ, 2008).
Some researchers may argue that olfactory sensory processing
goes against a thalamus-centric consciousness model since the
olfactory system is the only sensory system that bypasses the
thalamus (Kay and Sherman, 2007) but this is not the case.
Olfactory sensory information is instead relayed to the cortex
via the olfactory bulb, a structure that is very similar to the
thalamus in both structure and function (Kay and Sherman,
2007). The thalamus receives the majority of olfactory sensory
information indirectly via the cortex (Price and Slotnick, 1983;
Price, 1985), with a few ﬁbers connecting the olfactory bulb to
the mediodorsal thalamus (Öngür and Price, 2000). Although
received indirectly, olfactory sensory information is received and
integrated by the thalamus similar to all other sensory systems.
Odor stimulants have been shown to induce corresponding beta
oscillations in both the olfactory cortex and the mediodorsal
thalamus and the activity of these cortical and thalamic areas is
“tightly related” (Courtiol and Wilson, 2013). In addition, many
animal and human studies have indicated that the mediodorsal
thalamus plays a role in odor discrimination and olfactory
learning (Tham et al., 2009). The importance of the thalamus
in olfactory processing and perception can also be seen in
patients with thalamic lesions. These patients have been shown
to have signiﬁcantly impaired olfactory abilities, demonstrating
the important role of the thalamus in olfaction (Sela et al., 2009).
The important role of corticothalamic feedback loops in
consciousness is well-supported and many consciousness models
involve information being sent back and forth between the
thalamus and cortex (Edelman, 2004; Baars et al., 2013).
There are also many models and studies that demonstrate the
important role of the thalamus in consciousness (Min, 2010).
The thalamus used to be thought of as simply a relay station
for sensory information but recent studies have shown that the
thalamus is actually involved in sensory processing (Cudeiro and
Sillito, 2006; Ward, 2013). Sensory-speciﬁc thalamic structures
are likely involved in multi-sensory integration (Tyll et al.,
2011). In addition, the thalamus, in coordination with the
brainstem, regulates levels of consciousness and alters levels
of consciousness during sleep (Steriade, 1992). It has been
suggested that there is a central hub of consciousness that
synchronizes neural activity into conscious content and the role
of the thalamus in relaying and receiving feedback from the
cortex makes the thalamus a prime candidate for this hub of
consciousness (Min, 2010).
In our model we propose that conscious experience arises
when the dynamic neural sensory memory space is ﬁlled in by
input from the thalamus. Many studies discuss this phenomenon
of the ﬁlling-in of neural representations in consciousness
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
(Pollen, 2003). In addition, studies on afterimages suggest that
positive afterimages are likely the result of representations ﬁlled
in by cortical activity (Holcombe et al., 2004) and perceptual
ﬁlling in occurs in the blind spot on the retina where there
are no photoreceptors (Spillmann et al., 2006). The mechanisms
underlying both neural representations and ﬁlling-in within
these representations are highly debated (Spillmann et al.,
2006). We propose that the important role of the thalamus
in sensory processing, integration, and consciousness suggests
that one role of the thalamus may underlie the ﬁlling in of
neural representations of both visual and non-visual sensory
information.
Our consciousness model focuses predominantly on sensory
consciousness and integration because these are some of the
most widely researched and accessible areas of consciousness.
Human subjects are able to describe their sensory experiences
under various conditions and we can observe the responses
of animal subjects to sensory stimuli. Interpretation of this
data in combination with neural electrical activity, neural blood
ﬂow, etc., gives insights into sensory consciousness processes.
In addition, we believe that sensory integration and direction
of attention, which occur via the thalamus, are key steps for
conscious perception of a stimulus and consciousness to occur;
therefore, our consciousness model emphasizes the role of
sensory integration. Sensory integration may combine processed
sensory information into a format which allows for conscious
awareness. Of course, sensory integration is a process and
information is sent back and forth between the thalamus and
various cortical areas for further processing and integration;
therefore, it is unclear at which point this information arises
to consciousness. The speciﬁcs of this model, beyond what we
have described, require further study to elucidate. We propose
that thalamocortical oscillations resonate with incoming sensory
information and corticothalamic processing, integration, and
attention processes all contribute to formatting information
so that it rises to conscious awareness. The speciﬁcs of the
frequencies of oscillatory activity that may access conscious
content require further investigation; however, many studies have
found widespread phase synchronization of gamma oscillations
is associated with conscious perception (Melloni et al., 2007;
Doesburg et al., 2009). Electrical stimulation of the thalamic
reticular nucleus induces gamma oscillations in the cortex
(Macdonald et al., 1998) and widespread gamma oscillatory
activity has been shown to originate in the thalamus (Ribary et al.,
1991). During the induction of slow-wave sleep the thalamus
and cortex disconnect and deactivation of the thalamus has
been shown to precede cortical deactivation by several minutes
(Magnin et al., 2010). Slow-wave sleep is dominated by globally
coherent slow oscillations (Steriade et al., 1993); however, these
slow oscillations may have the ability to trigger faster oscillatory
activity such as sleep spindles and beta and gamma oscillations
(Steriade et al., 1996). These slow oscillations and gamma activity
are coupled (Mena-Segovia et al., 2008) but this gamma activity
is local rather than the widespread thalamacortical activity of
waking states (Valderrama et al., 2012). These studies suggest
that widespread corticothalamic gamma oscillations, originating
from the thalamus, may underlie consciousness. Furthermore,
attentional gating by the thalamus, particularly the thalamic
reticular nucleus (TRN), is likely essential for what processed
information rises to conscious awareness and which information
remains unconscious.
Many studies have indicated that the thalamic reticular
nucleus (TRN) likely plays an important role in attentional
gating (McAlonan et al., 2000; Lam and Sherman, 2011) and
sensory processing and integration (Crabtree, 1999). Francis
Crick proposed that the TRN controls an “internal attentional
searchlight” which directs attention within the brain (Crick,
1984). He and others have proposed that this attentional
searchlight occurred via the rapid burst ﬁring of the TRN
(Crick, 1984). A study on classical conditioning showed the
TRN is likely involved in attentional gating (McAlonan et al.,
2000). Another study found that some somatosensory TRN
neurons receive input from multiple thalamic regions and
nuclei, suggesting that some TRN neurons integrate multiple
thalamic inputs and may direct attention by inhibiting or
disinhibiting certain thalamic relay cells and eﬀectively gating
sensory information sent to the cortex (Lam and Sherman, 2011).
The TRN has been hypothesized to be involved in regulating
cortical oscillations and regulating waking and sleeping states.
For example, selective drive of TRN causes thalamic burst ﬁring
and cortical spindles from tonic ﬁring (Halassa et al., 2011).
Sensory projections from the TRN regulate sensory processing
and limbic projections from the TRN are involved in regulating
arousal. The TRN’s involvement in regulating both sensory and
limbic processing demonstrates the TRN’s role in regulating
both processing of both external and internal information
(Halassa et al., 2014) and suggests the TRN’s major role in
consciousness. In fact, some previous researchers have proposed
a RTN-centric model of consciousness in which a conscious state
consists of TRN-modulated corticothalamic synchronization
(Min, 2010).
Attention and consciousness are highly related and some
researchers even equate the two but these processes should not
be considered one and the same (Koch and Tsuchiya, 2007).
This can be illustrated by the fact that subjects can be aware
of an object without input from top-down attention processes
and subjects can attend to objects they are not consciously
aware of (Koch and Tsuchiya, 2007). Both the Global Workspace
Theory and our model emphasize the important role of working
memory in consciousness. Memory and attention both play
important roles in constructing moment to moment experiences
within the active sensory memory space. Attention processes and
memory input are integrated with processed incoming sensory
information to ﬁll in the sensory memory space. Although
conscious experience appears to be seamless, many studies have
shown that information processing is likely done in distinct
snapshots, similar to a movie reel that is made up of separate
images (Marchetti, 2014). Marchetti points out that we can
both relive past events and envision future events and that
actually perceiving an object “feels” diﬀerent than imagining
that same object, which feels diﬀerent than remembering that
object. However, all of these consciousness processes involve
the active construction of these events using both attention
and working memory (Marchetti, 2014). We propose that all
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
7
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
these processes occur in the neural sensory memory space of
the 3D default space and that even the ﬁlling-in of temporal
conscious events by the thalamus is inﬂuenced by attention and
memory.
Due to the fundamental importance of the function of
consciousness in regards to consciousness studies and models
we should discuss the view promoted by our model. Our
view on the function of consciousness is that it allows for
optimal interactions with the environment and it is involved in
decision-making. In a paper on the function of consciousness,
Earl proposes that many actions are the result of unconscious
automatic response programs while conscious experiences such
as thoughts, decision-making, planning, and non-automatic
responses involve a ﬂexible response mechanism (Earl, 2014).
Much of the processing done by the brain is unconscious and
the ability of content to rise to conscious awareness allows for
ﬂexible responses in situations where an automatic response may
have resulted in sub-optimal or negative consequences. This is
evidenced by the loss of feelings or emotions being associated
with poor decision-making. For example, patients with damage
to areas of the brain involved in generating emotions exhibit
dysfunctional decision-making and reasoning (Damasio, 1995).
In addition, patients with blindsight do not make intentional
responses to visual stimuli in their blind hemiﬁelds even though
they have unconscious knowledge of the stimuli (Persaud and
Cowey, 2008).
Due to the role of thalamus in relaying, processing, and
integrating both sensory information and intrinsic conscious
content, it is inherently diﬃcult to test whether the thalamus
is a primary hub for consciousness. However, it is inherently
diﬃcult to test any consciousness model, due to the subjective
nature of conscious experience and the emergent properties
of consciousness from neural activity as a whole rather than
individual parts (Lehmann, 2013). We can, however, examine
and test speciﬁc predictions made by consciousness models.
Due to the vast thalamocortical feedback loops involved in
consciousness, it is diﬃcult to pinpoint whether consciousness
arises in the cortex or thalamus because the thalamus supplies
information to the cortex for processing and this information is
feedback and forth. In previous papers, we examined disorders
such as contralateral neglect syndrome (Jerath and Crawford,
2014) and phantom limb (Jerath et al., 2015b) to gain insights
into consciousness and sensory processing; however, even in
the examining these disorders it is diﬃcult to determine
which structures give rise to consciousness. For example, in
contralateral neglect syndrome, lesions in the right parietal lobe
lead to neglect of the left visual scene and left side of the
body. We proposed that sensory information cannot be spatially
located in the damaged parietal lobe and this damaged or
lost information cannot rise to conscious awareness when it is
integrated with other sensory information and ﬁlled-in by the
thalamus (Jerath and Crawford, 2014). However, according to the
Global Workspace Model, one might propose that the sensory
information from the left side doesn’t rise to conscious awareness
because it cannot rise to conscious awareness within the damaged
parietal lobe (or be further processed and rise to conscious
awareness elsewhere in the cortex) and not the thalamus. At this
point, we must rely on indirect evidence to provide clues as to
the underlying mechanisms of consciousness and make testable
predictions from our models.
Our model proposes that the thalamus is the central hub
involved in multisensory integration and the majority of sensory
processing and integration is unconscious. It is not until this
information is processed and integrated into a format that
can arise to conscious awareness, such as in the form of
gamma oscillations that it becomes consciousness. Further,
research is needed to elucidate this model and the speciﬁc
frequencies associated with consciousness and various aspects of
unconscious processing. The Global Workspace Model proposes
that consciousness is necessary for multisensory integration
(Baars, 2002); however, studies have shown that consciousness
is not necessary for integration (Mudrik et al., 2014) and
multisensory integration can occur in complete unawareness
(Faivre et al., 2014). Though, unconscious integration has
limitations and consciousness likely enables the establishment of
integration mechanisms which can then operate unconsciously,
as well as wider-range integration (Mudrik et al., 2014). These
studies highlight the important relationship between integration
and consciousness but they also illustrate that consciousness
is not required for integration as proposed by other models
such as the Global Workspace Model and consciousness
cannot be equated to integrated information such as in the
Integrated Information Theory. Mudrik and colleagues found
that consciousness is necessary for long range integration
but not short range integration of spatiotemporal information
(Mudrik et al., 2014) which may support our proposal that
gamma oscillations may be the frequency involved in conscious
awareness. Widespread gamma synchrony is associated with
consciousness perception (Melloni et al., 2007); therefore, this
oscillatory activity may be associated with the long range
integration involved in consciousness. In addition, consciousness
is necessary for integration of novel information but is not
required for previously learned integration (Mudrik et al., 2014).
The Global Workspace Model also proposes that in the
absence of awareness there is no feedback from the frontal
areas of the brain (Baars, 2005). In experiments on conscious
and unconscious stimuli, masked words resulted in drastically
reduced activation throughout the brain, when compared to
unmasked words, and were undetectable in prefrontal and
parietal areas (Dehaene et al., 2001). This study and studies
that show increased metabolism in frontoparietal areas during
restful wakefulness (Raichle and Mintun, 2006) suggest that
frontoparietal networks play an important role in consciousness
(Tagliazucchi et al., 2013a). In addition, hypometabolism in
frontoparietal areas has been implicated in unconscious states
such as deep sleep, coma, anesthesia, loss of consciousness
during epileptic episodes which is also consistent with the
Global Workspace Model (Baars, 2005). However, it has not
been established whether sleep is associated with a breakdown
in global connectivity or disconnection of the frontoparietal
area alone (Tagliazucchi et al., 2013a). In addition, a masking
study found that prefrontal networks, including the inferior
frontal cortex, can be activated during unconscious trials (Van
Gaal et al., 2010), demonstrating prefrontal activation from
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
8
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
unconscious stimuli. We propose that frontoparietal networks
play an important role in consciousness but that frontoparietal
activation is not the “linchpin” of consciousness, rather processed
information from frontoparietal areas must return to the
thalamus to rise to consciousness.
Our 3D default space model proposes that the default mode
network (DMN), other resting state networks, reticular activating
system, and cardiorespiratory oscillations create the idling neural
activity of the brain on which faster oscillatory activity builds
and that forms the neural sensory memory space that is ﬁlled
in by the thalamus. Low frequency ﬂuctuations of the DMN
correlate with respiratory oscillations; however, the eﬀects of
respiratory and cardiac oscillations on DMN analysis is poorly
understood (Birn et al., 2008). As stated earlier, these respiratory
and hemodynamic ﬂuctuations are generally considered artifacts;
however, Yuan and colleagues found signiﬁcant correlation
between alpha, respiratory, and BOLD signals, and suggested
that this oscillatory activity may have a common neuronal origin
(Yuan et al., 2012). Though few studies have examined the
role of cardiorespiratory oscillations in DMN activity, many
studies have established that the DMN plays an important role
in consciousness. For example, unconsciousness due to epileptic
seizures may be due to inhibition of brainstem arousal systems
that maintain the DMN during awake states (Danielson et al.,
2011). In addition, levels of DMN connectivity correlate with
behavioral signs of awareness and levels of consciousness in
vegetative, minimally conscious (Fernández-Espejo et al., 2012),
and brain-damaged patients (Vanhaudenhuyse et al., 2010). Deep
sleep has been shown to disrupt frontoparietal DMN activity
but not inactivate it completely (Tagliazucchi et al., 2013b). This
raises the question: if DMN activity enables consciousness then
why is the DMN still active during an unconsciousness state such
as deep sleep? (Tagliazucchi et al., 2013a) It has been proposed
that this preserved DMN connectivity may be due to homeostatic
processes and baseline neural activity of the brain that persists
even in deep sleep (Raichle, 2010), which is consistent with our
hypothesis.
Testable Predictions of Our Model:
- Thalamus is the central hub of consciousness that is highly
involved in integrating and processing sensory information
and
allows
for
consciousness
to
arise
from
processed
information from the cortex.
- Multisensory integration is primarily an unconscious process,
as opposed to other models that propose consciousness is
needed for multisensory integration.
- As other consciousness models have proposed, frontoparietal
networks are important for consciousness; however, we
propose that information processed by these networks must be
sent back and integrated by the thalamus to rise to conscious
awareness.
- Thalamic and corticothalamic gamma oscillatory activity likely
underlies consciousness and which processed information rises
to conscious awareness.
- First layer of neural activity consists of default mode
network, resting networks, reticular activating system, and
cardiorespiratory oscillations create baseline neural activity on
which other activity builds and these oscillations create the
neural sensory memory space that is ﬁlled in by the thalamus.
This layer consists of primarily slow oscillations and delta
frequencies.
- Second layer of neural activity consists of limbic activity which
may be composed primarily of beta and theta oscillatory
activity.
- Third layer consists of corticothalamic activity and higher
processing which is composed primarily of alpha and gamma
frequencies.
- The second and third layers of neural activity build on the
slow oscillatory activity of the ﬁrst layer and are involved in
processing information that the thalamus ﬁlls into the active
sensory memory space.
Testing Consciousness Models
The central deep location of the thalamus within the brain, as well
as the important functional role of the thalamus in many neural
processes makes it diﬃcult to study in terms of consciousness.
Complete removal of the thalamus would likely result in coma
or death therefore, it is diﬃcult to determine the possible role
of the thalamus as the central hub for consciousness, as we have
proposed in our model. Various studies have inactivated areas of
the thalamus but inactivation of the entire thalamus has proven
diﬃcult. For example, injection of muscimol, a GABAA receptor
agonist, or tetrodotoxin into the somatosensory thalamus
inactivates this area of the thalamus and results in enhanced
slow membrane potential ﬂuctuations in cortical neurons during
quiet wakefulness but hyperpolarized and suppressed these
ﬂuctuations during active wakefulness (Poulet et al., 2012).
Inactivation of this thalamic area resulted in a membrane
potential variance of close to zero in corresponding cortical
neurons (Poulet et al., 2012). These studies demonstrate thalamic
control of cortical activity and give methods of inactivating areas
of the thalamus which could be applied to studying consciousness
models. In addition, expression of channelrhodopsin-2 in the
somatosensory thalamus and exposure of the area to blue light
via optical ﬁbers is another method that has been used to
activate and inactivate the somatosensory thalamus (Poulet et al.,
2012). The enhancement of slow-waves by inactivation of the
somatosensory thalamus may be similar to the enhancement
of slow-waves that occurs during non-REM sleep, when the
thalamus and cortex deactivate (Magnin et al., 2010), though on
a much smaller scale and during an awake state. Injections of
muscimol, tetrodotoxin, or optigenetic deactivation are various
methods that could be attempted on a larger scale and applied to
the entire thalamus to examine the possible role of the thalamus
as the central hub of consciousness. However, the thalamus
and cortex are so inextricably linked that the thalamus is likely
required for consciousness that may arise via various cortical
hubs. Therefore, loss of consciousness due to complete removal
of the thalamus or inactivation of the thalamus does not preclude
the cortex from being a consciousness hub. To determine
whether consciousness hubs arise within the cortex or via the
thalamus we would have to interfere with the reentrant feedback
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
9
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
loops of corticothalamic processing at various feedforward
and feedback processing stages. Considering the millisecond-
timescale of corticothalamic processing and the vast parallel
processing that occurs throughout the cortex, this presents
seemingly insurmountable obstacles for current technology.
Currently available technology necessitates focusing on smaller-
scale studies, such as the experiments discussed above, to provide
insights into how and where consciousness arises. Injection
of muscimol or tetrodotoxin is not likely feasible to perform
on a millisecond time scale; however, optigenetic deactivation
may possibly be feasible on the needed timescale. For example,
optigenetic deactivation of the lateral geniculate nucleus in the
thalamus could be performed to study visual consciousness or
deactivation of the medial geniculate nucleus could be performed
to study auditory consciousness. Optigenetic deactivation of
the appropriate thalamic nuclei could be performed starting at
various millisecond increments after exposure to a stimulus.
This stimulus would need to elicit a known or established
evoked-potential response within the brain of the animal model
being used. Judging the point of conscious awareness as the
point at which a behavioral response to the stimulus was
observed from the animal would likely not give an accurate
moment of conscious awareness. This type of study should
be followed by optigenetic deactivation of the corresponding
cortical sensory area, following the same timeline. The point at
which the known evoked-potential response is elicited in both
the thalamic and cortical experiments could give insights as to
the point at which the stimulus reached conscious awareness and
reveal whether consciousness arises in thalamic or cortical hubs.
Further research is needed to foster better experiments to study
consciousness models such as the 3D default space model we have
proposed.
Conditions and Phenomena Explained by
Our Model
Our consciousness model can help to explain various conditions
such as contralateral neglect syndrome, phantom limb syndrome,
motion sickness, and vertigo, as well as phenomenon such as
blindsight and scotomas. The 3D default space is a large space
that is ﬁlled-in with processed sensory information that has
been intricately mapped by parietal networks (Figure 3). This
internal space recreates the outside world within the mind. In
a previous paper, we discussed insights about consciousness by
examining contralateral neglect (CN) syndrome. CN is most
commonly caused by lesions within the right parietal lobe.
Patients with CN have intact eyes and nervous systems but they
are unable to see or locate objects within external space on
their left sides (Kerkhoﬀ, 2001) and some patients are not even
able to feel sensations on the left side of their body (Kerkhoﬀ,
2001) (Figure 4). This disorder is well-documented clinically
and numerous studies on the disorder provide insights into
consciousness and how external space is recreated internally
within the mind (Jerath and Crawford, 2014). We propose that
both visual and non-visual information from the left side is lost
in the damaged right parietal lobe and cannot be integrated by
the thalamus within the 3D default space (Jerath and Crawford,
2014).
Our model may also provide insights into phantom limb
syndrome and phantom limb pain. In our consciousness model,
consciousness and body schema arise when sensory information
from throughout the body is processed by corticothalamic
feedback loops and integrated by the thalamus (Jerath and
Crawford, 2014). We propose that phantom limb syndrome
arises when a limb is lost but the neural circuits within the
brain, such as somatosensory and motor homunculi, remain
intact (Figure 5). This allows for phantom sensations to arise
from within the brain without aﬀerent signaling from the limb.
In addition, phantom pain is likely the result of the integration of
conﬂicting sensory information within the 3D default space, such
as the visual information that the limb is gone accompanied by
the phantom sensations that the limb is still intact. Furthermore,
cortical reorganization, in which nearby somatosensory areas
invade the amputated limb somatosensory area (Ramachandran
and Hirstein, 1998; Flor et al., 2006), can result in further
conﬂicting sensory information where phantom limb sensations
are felt on other body areas such as the face (Ramachandran and
Hirstein, 1998).
Motion sickness and vertigo are two more conditions that may
be explained by our model. Both motion sickness and vertigo
are likely the result of the integration of conﬂicting sensory
information by the thalamus within the 3D default space. In
the case of motion sickness, the visually perceived movement
and the vestibular systems perceived movement conﬂict with
each other. Similarly, the most common cause of vertigo is
from free-ﬂoating calcium crystals called “otoconia” that make
their way into the semicircular canals and distort the sense of
movement so that actual head movements, vision, and sensory
information from the vestibular system contradict each other and
cause a spinning sensation or dizziness. Again, the integration
of conﬂicting sensory information results in the sensation of
dizziness.
Similar supporting evidence is provided by studies on
blindsight. Patients with this condition are cortically blind
due to lesions in the striate cortex but they demonstrate
unconscious visual awareness, especially when doing forced-
choice procedures. These blind patients show a much higher
accuracy of identifying objects than from chance alone. Some
researchers propose that this phenomenon is due to possible
pockets of healthy tissue within the damaged striate cortex, which
may lead to enough visual processing for blindsight but not
conscious awareness (Fendrich et al., 1992). Others propose that
blindsight can occur, in the presence of damage to the striate
cortex, because of the lateral geniculate body (LGN) in the
thalamus (Schmid et al., 2010). The underlying mechanism of
blindsight may be similar to that of CN syndrome that results
from parietal lobe damage. In blindsight patients, we propose
that visual information is processed within the brain but the
information is not able to be processed within the damaged
striate cortex and it is therefore not able to be integrated by
the thalamus into the 3D default space. The visual information
is unconsciously processed but does not rise to conscious
awareness, similar to in CN.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
10
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
FIGURE 3 | Intrinsic spatial mapping of visual and non-visual stimuli
within the 3D default space. This ﬁgure illustrates our proposed
mechanism of how two separate images of a visual scene from each retina
are imperceptibly and instantaneously combined into a single seamless
image within the mind. The simpliﬁed visual pathway illustrates how light from
the scene projects onto each retina, including the aligned foveae, and is
processed via the visual pathways. The separate monocular images
converge within the primary visual cortex, are processed within
corticothalamic feedback loops and the thalamus integrates the information
from these feedback loops. Although the retinas are intrinsically wired for
distance, the parietal lobes create a spatial map of the visual scene as well as
a spatial map of the body and other sensory information. When this
processed visual and other sensory information, including the spatial
mapping, is integrated by the thalamus it makes the 3D default space. We
propose that the ﬁnal processed image that arises to conscious awareness is
ﬁlled-in by the thalamus and is experienced at the eyes. (Figure and ﬁgure
description reproduced with permission from copyright holder. Figure by
Lynsey Ekema, MSMI).
Studies on scotomas or blind spots may also support our
3D default space consciousness model. During visual processing,
scotomas are ﬁlled in within a neural representation and
a seamless visual image, lacking blind spots, is perceived
(Ramachandran and Gregory, 1991), supporting the proposition
of the creation of an internal neural representation such as
the visual space of the 3D default space. The phenomenon of
afterimages also supports a consciousness mechanism involving
the creation of a neural visual representation and ﬁlling-in
process. Both negative and positive afterimages involve higher
level cortical and ﬁlling-in processes (Shimojo et al., 2001;
Holcombe et al., 2004; Sperandio et al., 2012), challenging
the previous idea that these afterimages were the result of
over-stimulated photoreceptors in the retina (Brindley, 1962).
However, some researchers still propose that these afterimages
are generated within the retina (Zaidi et al., 2012).
Homeostasis and Slow Oscillations
We propose that the sensory memory space of larger 3D
default space is likely generated by oscillations emanating from
the spinal cord, brainstem, reticular activating system, default
mode network (DMN), and other salient networks (Jerath and
Crawford, 2015b). This active but idling space is then ﬁlled-in
with processed sensory information from throughout the entire
body, recreating both visual and non-visual space. The body plays
a signiﬁcant yet rarely recognized role in consciousness processes.
Constant aﬀerent sensory feedback from the body, which helps
maintain homeostasis, is processed within the brain and forms
the non-visual portion of the ﬁlled-in 3D default space. Some
of this non-visual sensory information remains unconscious,
but may still lead to homeostatic changes throughout the body,
while other non-visual sensory information rises to conscious
awareness. This results in conscious experiences of sensations
such as smelling a scent, hearing a sound, or feeling hunger pains,
or thirst.
The
body
exhibits
slow
and
infra-slow
physiological
oscillations ranging from 1 Hz to <0.01 Hz (Hiltunen et al.,
2014). Cardiorespiratory oscillations integrate with brainstem
pacemakers and salient networks, including the DMN, modulate
neural, and autonomic nervous system activity, and may lead
to widespread cellular membrane potential changes (Jerath
et al., 2014a). We also propose that these membrane potential
changes may occur with each inspiration and expiration (Jerath
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
11
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
FIGURE 4 | Connections of the left and right parietal cortex: visual
ﬁelds and body space. The ﬁgure depicts how the right parietal lobe,
in a healthy individual, receives visual information from the left eye, and
sensory information from the left side of the body while the left parietal
lobe receives sensory information from the right eye and right side of
the body. The parietal lobes spatially map this information so that the
mind can spatially locate stimuli. In contralateral neglect syndrome, when
the right parietal lobe is damaged, information is fed to both parietal
lobes, like in a healthy individual, but the intact left parietal lobe is able
to spatially locate visual and sensory stimuli while the damaged right
parietal lobe is not. The external visual information and internal sensory
information sent to the damaged right parietal lobe does not become
spatially oriented, like it does in a healthy individual, so this information
never becomes a part of conscious awareness within the 3D default
space. This results in a patient not being able to see or feel stimuli on
their left side, even though their eyes, occipital lobe, and nerves are
functioning normally. (Figure and ﬁgure description reproduced with
permission from copyright holder. Figure by Lynsey Ekema, MSMI).
et al., 2014b). The glial syncytium maintains a high resting state
membrane potential, ranging from −80 to −90 mV (Verkhratsky
and Butt, 2013). Astrocytes generally have membrane potentials
around 20 mv higher than surrounding neurons (Somjen, 1995).
We propose that the higher resting membrane potential of
astrocytes may be involved in the maintenance of the membrane
potentials of surrounding neurons. For example, astrocytes likely
regulate concentrations of extracellular potassium via spatial
buﬀering, as well as carrier-operated and channel-operated
potassium chloride uptake (Walz, 2000). When a neuron
discharges this leads to increases in extracellular potassium
concentrations, which can then interfere with neuronal signaling
by causing further neuronal depolarizations. Astrocytes take
up this excess potassium, which leads to a local depolarization
which results in the dispersal of potassium into the bloodstream.
This allows for normal neuronal action potential propagation to
continue. In addition, widespread membrane potentials of neural
and non-neural cells throughout the body may be maintained by
the cardiorespiratory system (Jerath et al., 2014a).
These slow oscillations dynamically synchronize and interact
and may be involved with energy metabolism. The physiological
and homeostatic interactions of all body tissues and cells, provide
energy to neurons, astrocytes, and form an active infrastructure
in which transmissions from peripheral areas of the body
reach the thalamus and are processed within corticothalamic
feedback loop within milliseconds. For example, neural networks
within the corticothalamic system process and perceive visual
sensory information within 150 milliseconds (Thorpe et al.,
1996). It is well-known that during disorders of homeostasis,
such as ﬂuid imbalance (dehydration), brain metabolic activity
is ineﬃcient and prolonged dehydration may negatively aﬀect
executive functioning (Kempton et al., 2011). Other homeostatic
disruptions include deviations from optimum oxygen levels and
calcium homeostasis. For example, hypoxia induces neuronal cell
death in the brain (Malhotra et al., 2001) and leads to many
diﬀerent negative eﬀects throughout the body (Pierson, 2000).
Even too much oxygen can lead to negative eﬀects such as oxygen
toxicity (Stogner and Payne, 1992). Disruption of normal calcium
homeostasis can lead to hypercalcemia or hypocalcemia, both of
which have negative eﬀects on the body. Any imbalances in ionic
homeostasis can lead to major physiological ailments including
loss of consciousness and are known to underlie neurological
disorders such as epilepsy (Rogawski, 2000).
Layers of Neural Activity
We propose that neural activity consists of distinct but highly
interactive layers of oscillatory activity. The ﬁrst layer of neural
activity consists of the oscillatory activity from the default mode
network, other resting state networks, cardiorespiratory system,
and ascending reticular activating system (Jerath and Crawford,
2015b). These oscillations likely support all other neural activity
by creating an idling state in the brain on which other oscillatory
activity can build, as well as creating a uniﬁed space via slow
oscillatory activity. The majority of the energy utilized by the
brain can be attributed to the DMN (Fox et al., 2005) and 90% of
the energy used by the brain can be attributed to intrinsic activity
rather than activity provoked by stimuli (Raichle and Snyder,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
12
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
FIGURE 5 | Connections of the parietal and somatosensory cortex:
visual ﬁelds and body space. The orange lines are visual and non-visual
information sent to the right parietal cortex while the blue lines are visual and
non-visual information sent to the left parietal cortex. The red sensorimotor
cortices are depicted in each hemisphere and the corresponding red lines
illustrate the processed sensorimotor information that is ﬁlled in within 3D
default space. The ﬁgure depicts how the right parietal lobe and sensory
motor cortex, in a healthy individual, receives visual information from the left
eye, and sensory information from the left side of the body. The parietal lobe
spatially maps this information so that the mind can spatially locate stimuli. In
phantom limb syndrome, when the left arm has been amputated, visual
information that the limb is gone is received by the left eye and processed so
that the visual information ﬁlled into the 3D default space does not include a
left arm within the visual space. Though there is no longer sensorimotor
information ﬂowing from the now amputated limb to the cortex, the
sensorimotor and other networks in the brain are still intact. This leads to
intrinsically-generated sensations that are integrated within the 3D default
space, generating an intact non-visual representation of the limb and
phantom limb sensations. Phantom limb pain is likely due to the integration
of this contradictory sensory information and subsequent representation
within 3D default space. The solid lines extending through the body illustrate
the information, from the corresponding cortex, that is ﬁlled into the 3D
default space. (Figure and ﬁgure description reproduced with permission
from copyright holder. Figure by Michael Jensen MSMI, CMI).
2007), making the DMN a prime candidate for the baseline neural
activity. These oscillations also likely form the active sensory
memory space in which the thalamus ﬁlls in processed sensory
information. The sheer amount of energy utilized by intrinsic
neural activity and the involvement of the default mode network
and brainstem in consciousness suggest that default mode activity
and other intrinsic activity may underlie higher processing and
activity in the brain (Jerath and Crawford, 2015b). It has been
previously proposed that intrinsic neural activity may maintain
the framework of a spatiotemporally oriented virtual neural
space which helps to organize incoming sensory information
(Northoﬀ, 2013). However, it is extremely diﬃcult to determine
cause and eﬀect relationships underlying this oscillatory activity
or identify a neural “space” from neural activity; therefore, further
research is needed to elucidate this possible mechanism. We
propose that this slow-wave and synchronization activity of the
ﬁrst neuronal layer is an essential part of consciousness. For
example, sensory stimulation activates the ascending reticular
activating system projections to the thalamus which then activate
the cortex and trigger descending signaling to the spinal cord
(Garcia-Rill et al., 2013). This same system is also involved in
the lack of sensory awareness during slow-wave sleep and the
atonia of REM sleep, which prevents us from acting out dreams
(Garcia-Rill et al., 2013). Synchronized episodes of neural activity
throughout the brain may constitute the electrical signatures of
thoughts and behaviors (Thiagarajan et al., 2010). Modaﬁnil, a
drug used to promote wakefulness, increases electrical coupling
in the reticular activating system via gap junctions. It reduces
reticular activating system activity and the release of gamma
amino-butyric acid (GABA), which disinhibits other neural
systems and increases coherence within the reticular activating
system (Garcia-Rill et al., 2007) and corticothalamic system
(Urbano et al., 2007). These ﬁndings demonstrate the important
role of synchronization and the ascending reticular activating
system and thalamus in consciousness. Other speciﬁcs regarding
how this ﬁrst layer of neural activity functions requires further
research.
Normal thalamocortical oscillatory activity can range from
infra-slow to ultra-fast and is generated by short and long range
synchronizations (Timofeev et al., 2012). Neural synchronization
may be generated by varying degrees via chemical synaptic
mechanisms, gap junction activity, ionic ﬂuctuations, and
ephaptic coupling (Timofeev et al., 2012). Some studies have
suggested that infra-slow oscillations may synchronize faster
neural oscillations (Vanhatalo et al., 2004) and infra-slow
oscillations have been shown to be highly correlated with faster
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
13
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
oscillations ranging from 1 to 40 Hz, suggesting a relationship
between fast and slow oscillations (Monto et al., 2008). Another
study found a signiﬁcant correlation between alpha EEG power,
respiration, and BOLD signals during resting, suggesting a
relationship between this oscillatory activity as well as a possible
common neuronal origin (Yuan et al., 2013). In addition,
some researchers have proposed that the neuronal cytoskeleton,
which has been shown to support energy transport and
information processing, may be involved in establishing dynamic
synchronized brain states that may modulate connectivity
(Plankar et al., 2013). Synchronized oscillatory activity has been
shown to be involved in many cognitive processes and abnormal
neural synchronization may underlie many brain disorders
(Uhlhaas and Singer, 2006). We propose that the ﬁrst layer of
neural activity is involved this synchronization process, creating
a framework on which faster oscillatory activity builds, and
creating a dynamic neural sensory memory space (Jerath and
Crawford, 2015b).
The second layer of neural activity consists of limbic
oscillations and cardiorespiratory oscillatory activity while the
third layer consists of higher cognitive processes involving
corticothalamic feedback loops and consciousness processes. It
has been proposed that the limbic system may have evolved
before higher cortical areas (Holden, 1979) which is consistent
with our classiﬁcation of these neural activity layers. This layer
of higher cortical activity and oscillations are responsible for
the corticothalamic processing that ﬁlls in the 3D default space.
Emotions and feelings, arising from the limbic system layer, also
ﬁll in this space. These three layers form the sum of human
neural oscillatory activity (Figure 6). This proposed structuring
of neural activity helps to further clarify how our consciousness
mechanism works.
We propose that certain oscillations are associated with
speciﬁc layers of neural activity; however, these oscillations are
not conﬁned to any one layer. We propose that the ﬁrst layer
of activity is composed of slow oscillations and delta waves. The
default mode network of the ﬁrst layer consists of spontaneous
low frequency oscillations <0.1 Hz and respiratory, cardiac, and
blood pressure oscillations. These oscillations have been shown
to synchronize at 0.15 Hz at rest which may be due to decreased
activity of reticular neurons in the brainstem. In addition,
cholinergic neurons in the pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) of
the brainstem ﬁre in phase with slow oscillations during slow-
wave sleep and modulate cortical gamma activity (Mena-Segovia
et al., 2008). Delta oscillations are the predominant frequency of
waking reptiles and are prominent during early development in
humans and slow-wave sleep, suggesting that delta oscillations
may be associated with more ancient neural systems (Knyazev,
2012). Delta oscillations may also be involved in integrating
homeostatic processes and cerebral activity (Knyazev, 2012). In
addition, functional organization of respiratory, cardiac, and
delta-theta related rhythms is dependent on coupling between
cortical and reticular formation delta and other low frequency
oscillations (Lambertz and Langhorst, 1998). However, reticular
activating neurons of the PPN and intralaminar parafascicular
nucleus of the thalamus also exhibit electrical coupling and ﬁre at
beta/gamma frequencies when maximally activated (Garcia-Rill
et al., 2013), therefore activity in other frequency bands is also
observed in this and other layer.
The second layer or limbic layer is comprised predominantly
of beta and theta oscillations. For example, active brain states are
associated with hippocampal theta oscillations (Saper et al., 2010)
and electrical stimulation of limbic areas evokes theta oscillatory
activity (Gray, 1982). Neural activity in lower mammals is
dominated primarily by theta oscillations (Knyazev, 2012),
which may support the proposed role of theta activity in the
secondary layer. Negative emotions are associated with increased
beta responses (Güntekin and Ba¸sar, 2010) and beta oscillatory
activity is associated with motor control and is observed in the
basal ganglia (Bogacz, 2014). However, beta oscillations are also
observed in cortical sensorimotor (Kilavik et al., 2013) and visual
areas (Engel and Fries, 2010); therefore, the exact role of beta
oscillations within these layers requires further study. It has been
proposed that beta oscillatory activity is involved in maintaining
current sensorimotor and cognitive states so that beta activity
is enhanced if maintenance of the current state is intended or
predicted (Engel and Fries, 2010) and pathological increases in
beta activity, such as that seen in Parkinson’s disease, decreases
cognitive control (Engel and Fries, 2010). Lastly, the third
or corticothalamic layer consists primarily of alpha oscillatory
activity which has been associated with cognitive processing
and access to memory, and may have an inhibitory function
(Klimesch, 2012). Along with gamma oscillatory activity which
is associated with cognitive processing, perception, and memory
(Bosman et al., 2014).
Memory
Consciousness processes and memory processes are closely
linked and highly interactive. In fact, the reproduction of
external and internal space within the mind during consciousness
processing is supported by the phenomenon of memory. We
propose that memories cannot be made unless external and
internal space is reproducible within the mind. This reproduced
information must then be encoded, stored, and then it can be
retrieved back into the active sensory memory space of the
3D default space. For example, researchers have proposed that
each time a memory is revisited the memory is re-encoded
enhancing conceptual aspects which diminish contextual details
and sometimes add false information (Yassa and Reagh, 2013).
We propose this is because the memory is retrieved and
represented within the active sensory memory space of the 3D
default space where it is then re-encoded to be stored again.
Sensory impulses can be both externally activated and
internally generated. For example, sensory information from
end organs would constitute externally activated sensory content
while inner speech and mental imagery are internally activated.
A recent study has shown that mental imagery processing likely
involves top-down processing, a reversal of the direction of
information ﬂow from visual perception (Dentico et al., 2014).
This reversal of the predominant direction of cortical signal
ﬂow has also been proposed to underlie the phenomenon of
dreaming (Nir and Tononi, 2010). In addition, this reversal
may disrupt the usual formation of new memories and may
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
14
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
FIGURE 6 | Layers of neural activity. (A) depicts the ﬁrst layer of
neural activity that includes slow oscillations from the default mode
network and cardiorespiratory oscillations. This forms the basis for all
other layers of neural activity and is depicted by the blue coloring. (B)
includes limbic activity and is depicted by the red coloring. It is
associated with increased beta waves and decreased alpha waves. (C)
includes corticothalamic feedback loops involved in cognitive and
consciousness processes and is depicted by yellow coloring. This layer
is associated with increased alpha and gamma waves and decreased
beta waves. These layers combine to form (D), the sum of human
neural activity consisting of all neural and physiological oscillations. The
combination of this activity is denoted by the combination of the blue,
red, and yellow layers. (Figure and ﬁgure description reproduced with
permission from copyright holder. Figure by Lynsey Ekema, MSMI).
be responsible for dream amnesia (Nir and Tononi, 2010).
The phenomenon of dreaming helps to illustrate our concept
of the thalamus creating an internal representation of external
space within the mind. In our model, mental imagery, inner
speech, dreaming, and other internally activated sensory content
likely occurs via top-down processes that still involve integration
by the thalamus in order to rise to conscious awareness. We
propose that the sensory memory space is a neural space
within 3D default space in which conscious experience, which
is represented by the thalamus, can become encoded and stored
as memories that can be retrieved and brought back into
this sensory space during recollection. This is why we can
visualize a place or an event and remember the extensive details
and layouts of that scene. We have discussed the important
role of the thalamus in consciousness and many studies have
demonstrated the important role of the thalamus in memory
processing. For example, the anterior thalamus has extensive
connections to the hippocampus, involving the mammillary
bodies, retrosplenial cortex, and parts of the prefrontal cortex that
form memory pathways (Aggleton et al., 2010). In addition, the
thalamus, including the mediodorsal nucleus and anterior nuclei
are critical for recognition memory by recall during encoding
and retrieval (Pergola et al., 2013). The anterior cingulated
cortex, thalamus, and cerebellum all show high activation during
recollection (Cabeza et al., 1997). Another study showed that
patients with thalamic damage had deﬁcits in long-term memory
while patients with damage to the mammillothalamic pathway
experienced deﬁcits in short-term memory (Van Der Werf et al.,
2003).
A study on visual memory in CN patients had patients in
Milan describe the Piazza del Duomo, a well-known public
square. The patients were asked to imagine and describe the
square from two diﬀerent viewpoints. From the ﬁrst viewpoint,
the patients neglected to describe places on the left side of their
ﬁeld of view, which is consistent with the neglect seen in CN.
However, when describing the square from the second viewpoint,
the patients no longer included landmarks and places on the
left side that they had just described in the ﬁrst view (Bisiach
and Luzzatti, 1978). This study demonstrates the possible role
of the 3D default space as both an active sensory memory space
and a space where memories are recalled. In CN, patients do
not consciously see stimuli in their left visual ﬁeld and in some
cases cannot feel stimuli on the left side of their body. These
CN patients had seen this square before developing CN, but
their recollection of the memory of the place was aﬀected by
the parietal lesions. When the patients visualized the layout of
the square and then shifted their perspective to a new vantage
point they could no longer visualize those places that they had
just described a moment before because they were now in their
left visual ﬁeld, We propose that this is because the intact
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
15
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
memories are recalled within this active sensory memory space
for recollection but the damaged parietal lobe cannot spatially
locate the stimuli on the left side and it is lost from conscious
awareness.
Coma
The main indicator of a comatose state is the absence of arousal
and in turn the absence of consciousness. Comas are caused
by a disturbance in the reticular activating system and thalamic
projections. Thalamic lesions can lead to coma and paroxysmal
sleep (Bjornstad et al., 2003), demonstrating the important role
of the thalamus in consciousness. People in comas do not
experience normal sleep wake cycles. Comatose patients lack
both awareness and wakefulness while patients in a vegetative
state are in a state of partial arousal and lack true awareness.
A recent study that compared the neural activity of 32 patients
with chronic disorders of consciousness with 26 healthy controls
found that alpha networks in some of the patients, considered
to be in unresponsive vegetative states, actually exhibited well-
preserved alpha networks (Chennu et al., 2014). One patient
in particular demonstrated alpha band networks very similar
to healthy controls, including long-range connections between
occipital, parietal, and frontal regions of the brain (Chennu
et al., 2014). Studies like this can help us to recognize brain
activity that is indicative of conscious awareness in vegetative
patients that do not demonstrate physical responses but may
exhibit responsive neural activity when asked to imagine a
scene. In addition, studies involving vegetative patients have
demonstrated improvements in patient responsiveness following
thalamic stimulation; however, deﬁnitive evidence could not
be drawn from these studies because it cannot be determined
with certainty whether these improvements were related to
the thalamic stimulation or spontaneous recovery (Shah and
Schiﬀ, 2010). However, a case study on a patient who had
been in a coma for 6 years due to a traumatic brain injury,
found that thalamic stimulation resulted in the patient exhibiting
responsive behaviors to sensory stimulation directly related to
the stimulation (Schiﬀet al., 2007). There are various proposals
regarding the possible mechanisms underlying the eﬀects of
thalamic stimulation involving activating arousal systems and
introducing excitatory activity that may restore some normal
awake state neural activity (Shah and Schiﬀ, 2010). The use of
thalamic stimulation as a possible treatment in coma patients
demonstrates the important role of the thalamus in arousal and
consciousness processes.
Slow-wave Sleep
The thalamus, with its reciprocal fast connections to the cortex
during the awake state, forms the basis of cognition in a conscious
individual. During slow-wave sleep the thalamus shifts from tonic
ﬁring to burst mode. Tonic ﬁring during awake states transmits
information from the thalamus to the cortex while burst mode
ﬁring is likely involved in the disconnection of the thalamus
and cortex and subsequent unconsciousness (Purves et al.,
2001). Conscious experience is based on widespread membrane
potential changes that occur during both waking and sleep states.
In fact, widespread membrane potential changes may underlie
the restorative properties of sleep (Jerath et al., 2014c). Tononi
has proposed a similar hypothesis in which the function of sleep
is to reestablish synaptic homeostasis after an increase in synaptic
strength that occurs during wakefulness (Tononi and Cirelli,
2003). However, we go a step further and propose that the slow-
wave activity involved in this downscaling is due to progressively
increased levels of cardiorespiratory coherence during stages
of slow-wave sleep that lead to changes in sympathovagal
balance (Jerath et al., 2014c). This mechanism is consistent
with our current comprehensive model in which high levels
of cardiorespiratory coherence may modulate the autonomic
nervous system and cause a shift toward parasympathetic
dominance during meditative states (Jerath et al., 2014a), as
well as the possible direct eﬀects of respiration on widespread
membrane potential changes (Jerath et al., 2014b). In addition,
during slow wave sleep, disconnection between the thalamus and
cortex occurs and activity of the thalamus and cortex decrease
(Magnin et al., 2010). There is also reduced corticothalamic
connectivity during general anesthesia (White and Alkire, 2003)
and thalamic metabolism and blood ﬂow are also reduced (Alkire
and Miller, 2005). These studies emphasize the important role of
the thalamus and corticothalamic connectivity in consciousness.
In addition, thalamic deactivation usually precedes cortical
deactivation at the onset of slow-wave sleep. This likely underlies
the experience of hallucinations that can occur during this
transition, as well as the common over-estimation of the time
taken to fall asleep (Magnin et al., 2010). In our model, the
oscillations that create the 3D default space and corticothalamic
feedback loops orient us to time and space, therefore this
deactivation and disconnection of the thalamus followed by
the cortex can result in hallucinations (distortions of visual
space) and distortions in the perception of time. This study
demonstrates the importance of corticothalamic interactions in
consciousness as well as how corticothalamic interactions can
aﬀect the perception of time within the 3D default space.
REM Sleep and Dreaming
Examining dreaming, as well as contrasting dream states with
waking states can contribute novel insights to the study of
consciousness (Windt and Noreika, 2011). Dreaming consists
of a unique state of consciousness in which the brain is in
a closed system and does not experience external input from
the environment. Dreams consist of subjective experiences
that depend solely on already stored information in the
brain (D’Agostino et al., 2013). Many researchers propose
that dreaming does not involve reﬂective-awareness. Although,
it is likely that the same levels of reﬂective-awareness that
are present during waking states are not present during
dreaming, it would be inaccurate to claim dream states lack self-
awareness altogether. For example, emotions and feelings of self-
consciousness are common experiences in dreams (Kahan and
Laberge, 1994).
Lucid dreaming is dreaming in which one is aware that one
is dreaming and is able to exert some control over the content
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
16
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
of the dream (Holzinger et al., 2006). In non-lucid dreaming,
a person is unable to distinguish whether or not the experience
is actually occurring. In addition, people with mental disorders,
involving hallucinations, experience abnormal awareness during
waking consciousness because they are unable to distinguish
between externally and internally generated percepts, similar
to what occurs in non-lucid dream states (D’Agostino et al.,
2013). It is interesting to note that many mental and mood
disorders also experience disorder-speciﬁc dreams (Beauchemin
and Hays, 1995; Cartwright et al., 2006; Lusignan et al.,
2009). By examining dreams, we can gain insights into how
neural activity translates into conscious experience (D’Agostino
et al., 2013). When compared to non-lucid dreaming, lucid
dreaming is associated with higher levels of beta-1 frequency
band oscillations in both parietal regions (Holzinger et al.,
2006). Lucid dreaming consists of features indicative of both
waking and non-lucid dreaming states of consciousness (Voss
et al., 2009). Waking is characterized by high alpha band
coherence while lucid dreaming is characterized by increased
theta and delta coherence (Voss et al., 2009). This theta and
delta coherence is highest in the frontal cortex and likely
involves higher activation in the dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) (Voss et al., 2009). REM sleep is usually associated
with decreased activation in the DLPFC, which may explain the
reduced self-awareness that occurs during non-lucid dreaming
(Muzur et al., 2002), Voss et al. proposes that what Edelman
has termed “secondary” consciousness is activated during lucid
dreaming, which accounts for the similarities of neural activity
experienced during lucid dreaming and waking states (Voss et al.,
2009). According to Edelman, primary consciousness consists
of a present multimodal scene while secondary consciousness
involves various other features including reﬂection, abstract
thought, and consciousness of being conscious (Edelman, 2004).
Edelman proposes that primary consciousness occurs during
non-lucid dream states while secondary consciousness occurs
during lucid dream states (Edelman, 2004); however, Foulkes
proposes that the ever-present characteristic of dreaming, in
which an imagined scene is integrated and constructed by long-
term memory, likely involves secondary consciousness processes
(Foulkes, 1999). The generation of internally-generated scenes
FIGURE 7 | Representations of mind-body response during stress
and meditation. The ﬁgure illustrates the spectrum of emotion states
and corresponding physiological states. At the far end of the spectrum
is a stressed sympathetic state. The largest encompassing circle
represents the entire body and homeostatic state, while the large circle
inside represents the afferent signaling from the body. At the left end of
the spectrum, in the parasympathetic meditative state, the heart is
smaller to depict decreased heart rate, and increased cardiorespiratory
coherence. The heart and brain are depicted connected to illustrate the
increased synchronization and coherence that occurs in more calm
states. The brain is large to show increased cognitive abilities during
this state and the orb representing the afferent signals from the body is
smaller in size to depict less chaotic and more synchronized signaling.
At the far right end of the spectrum, in this stressed sympathetic state,
the afferent signaling from the body is larger to depict how the brain is
dominated, and distracted by powerful and chaotic afferent signaling
throughout the body. The heart is also larger to show the increased
heart rate during this state and decreased cardiorespiratory coherence.
The brain is smaller to illustrate the decreased cognitive abilities during
anxiety and stressed states. In addition, during this state, the brain and
heart are depicted as separate because many neural, and physiological
oscillations are desynchronized during this state. Overall, a relaxed mind
is associated with decreased excitation and cardiorespiratory coherence
while a stressed or anxious mental state, with highly activated emotion
centers in the brain, is associated with more desynchronized
cardiorespiratory rhythms and high excitation throughout the body.
(Figure and ﬁgure description reproduced with permission from copyright
holder. Figure by Michael Jensen MSMI, CMI).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
17
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
is present in both non-lucid and lucid dreaming, suggesting the
involvement of secondary consciousness characteristics in both
non-lucid and lucid of dreaming.
Role of Respiration and Emotions
Both neural impulses and physiological feedback play a
signiﬁcant role in the experience of emotions. In fact, respiration
and emotions are so correlated that respiration (Bloch et al.,
1991) and cardiorespiratory activity (Rainville et al., 2006) can
be used to distinguish between diﬀerent emotions. The medulla
and pons, where respiratory rhythms are generated in the brain
(Feldman and Del Negro, 2006), have eﬀerent and aﬀerent
connections with the limbic system (Homma and Masaoka, 2008;
Evans, 2010). A study examining increased respiration rates and
anxiety detected respiration-related anxiety potentials in limbic
areas of the brain following inspiration (Masaoka and Homma,
2000). These studies further illustrate the strong relationship
between emotions and respiration. The modulation of emotions
by respiration can be utilized as a possible treatment of mood
disorders, and to help reduce stress and enhance feelings of well-
being. By practicing slow, deep breathing such as pranayama or
meditation people may be able to actively inﬂuence their mental
and emotional state. We have proposed that cardiorespiratory
and default mode network oscillatory activity, which make up
idling activity of the brain, likely underlie faster oscillations
involved in higher processing (Jerath and Crawford, 2015b).
The relationship between respiration and emotions further
emphasizes the important role of respiration in inﬂuencing both
unconscious and conscious neural activity and further highlights
the inﬂuence of the body on the mind. Too often, consciousness
models neglect the signiﬁcant signaling and feedback from the
body that inﬂuences neural activity; our model recognizes these
inputs and incorporates them in our proposed mechanism. We
propose that the autonomic nervous system is likely modulated
by increased levels of cardiorespiratory coherence that occur
during slow, deep breathing, and meditation (Jerath et al., 2012)
(Figure 7).
FIGURE 8 | Responses associated with sympathetic dominance. The
dual-sided autonomic nervous system is shown in which sympathetic
activation outweighs the parasympathetic branch. Sympathetic dominance,
as seen during the stressed state, leads to a variety of peripheral responses
associated with depolarization of target organs. There is an increase in DMN
activity and mind wandering. Functional connectivity and alpha waves
decrease, while limbic and amygdala activity increase. Brainstem activity also
increases, reﬂected by the increased respiratory center and cardiovascular
center rates. Respiration and heart rate increase. Heart rate variability
measures are dominated by low frequency components. Blood pressure,
skin conductivity, and muscle tension increase. Bowel motility and salivary
gland secretion are also hindered. The relatively depolarized state is
illustrated by red shading throughout the various target organs and spinal
cord. Facial expression depicts a stressed or unpleasant state. (Figure and
ﬁgure description reproduced with permission from copyright holder. Figure
by Michael Jensen MSMI, CMI).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
18
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
Mindfulness Meditation and Pranayama
The central role of widespread membrane potential based
homeostasis can also explain how slow deep breathing, such as
in pranayama, can lead to autonomic modulation. This topic
and the possible underlying mechanisms have been discussed
in detail in our previous articles (Jerath et al., 2006, 2012).
Changes in mental state, from anxiety to a meditative or relaxed
state, are due to a total body response with associated changes
in cardiorespiratory, peripheral, and DMN oscillations (Jerath
and Barnes, 2009). This mechanism is at play during awake
states, when memory, attention, and cognitive skills can be
enhanced by meditation (Mrazek et al., 2013). This underlying
meditation mechanism is similar to but less pronounced than the
previously discussed mechanism that underlies the widespread
hyperpolarization that occurs during slow wave sleep (Jerath
et al., 2014c). This may also be associated with the membrane
potential driven disconnection of thalamus from the cortex may
be involved in sleep. One study found that disconnection of
thalamic neurons from the cortex resulted in a hyperpolarization
of around 9 mv, as well as the generation of spontaneous slow
oscillations (Dossi et al., 1992).
Many known observations during meditation such as an
attainment of calmness, feeling of oneness with the universe may
be due to sub-conscious respiration-induced low and ultra slow
frequency rhythmic changes in membrane potential throughout
the body. In a previous paper, we correlated respiration with
widespread membrane potential changes, speciﬁcally widespread
depolarization during expiration and repolarization during
inspiration (Jerath et al., 2014b). In this model, we go a step
further to propose that these widespread membrane potential
changes that may occur as a direct result of inspiration and
expiration are enhanced by slow deep breathing and increased
cardiorespiratory coherence and these membrane potential
changes result in the slow oscillatory activity involved in creating
the framework of the 3D default space. The correlation of
respiration to widespread depolarization and repolarization has
been previously proposed (Jerath et al., 2014b). In addition, the
FIGURE 9 | Responses associated with parasympathetic dominance.
The dual-sided autonomic nervous system is shown, in which
parasympathetic activation outweighs the sympathetic branch. In contrast to
sympathetic dominance, a shift to prominent parasympathetic activation
leads to peripheral responses associated with membrane potential
hyperpolarization and the reversal of the effects seen in Figure 8. In this
state, DMN activity and mind wandering decrease, leading to more mental
focus and increased memory. There is an increase in functional connectivity
and alpha waves and a decrease in limbic and amygdala activity. Brain stem
activity decreases, which is reﬂected in decreased respiratory center and
cardiovascular center rates. Heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, and
muscle tension all decrease. High frequency heart rate variability is increased.
This parasympathetic shift can be readily achieved through meditation and
deep breathing techniques. A pleasant facial expression is associated with
this state and yellow shading throughout the ﬁgure help illustrate
hyperpolarization, compared to the red color of the relatively depolarized
state in Figure 8. (Figure and ﬁgure description reproduced with permission
from copyright holder. Figure by Michael Jensen MSMI, CMI).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
19
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
TABLE 1 | Comparison of 3D default space consciousness model and other current models.
Questions addressed by consciousness models:
Integrated
Global
3D default
information
workspace
space
theory
theory
theory
Does it involve a global theory involving brain and body?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Does corticothalamic activity play a major role?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Does it address underlying physiology?
No
Yes, partially
Yes
Is it an expandable model? (Can it be integrated with other models?)
Limited expandability
Limited expandability
Yes
Can the model be visualized via illustrations?
No
No
Yes
Does the model address emotions?
Yes, partially
Yes, partially
Yes
Does it address cardiorespiratory coherence?
No
No
Yes
Does it address the role of breathing on various rhythms including the brain?
No
No
Yes
Does it address the role of homeostasis and membrane potential changes?
No
No
Yes
Is the thalamus a central hub for consciousness in the model?
No
No
Yes
How is consciousness perceived?
Externally
Externally
Internally
Does the model explain the self?
No
No
Not at present
Does the model explain how of visual and other sensory inputs are integrated?
Yes
No
Yes
Can the model illustrate the etiological deﬁcits of the following disorders:
a) Contralateral neglect syndrome
No
No
Yes
b) Phantom limb
No
No
Yes
c) Motion sickness
No
No
Yes
d) Vertigo
No
No
Yes
e) Claustrophobia
No
No
Yes
Can the model explain anxiety vs. mind-body response and the involved underlying physiology?
No
No
Yes
Does the model address how emotions and sensory info is integrated?
No
No
Yes
Does the model have experimental evidence?
Partial
Partial
Partial
Does the model include the autonomic nervous system?
No
No
Yes
Limitations of these consciousness models:
a) Does it identify spatiotemporal coordinates of emotions?
No
No
No
b) Does it detail the link between neural oscillations and visual and auditory consciousness?
No
No
No
c) Can the model explain the relationship of body movement to 3D default space?
N/A
N/A
No
Green indicates that the consciousness model addresses the corresponding question while red indicates that the model does not address the question.
TABLE 2 | Summary of 3D default space consciousness model.
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
3D default space
Main function
Forms the neural sensory
memory space
Consists of limbic activity,
emotions and feelings, as well
as gut and viscera connections
Higher processing,
consciousness, involved in ﬁlling
in the sensory memory space
Involved in consciousness and
homeodynamic processes
Areas of neural
activity
Default mode network, resting
state networks, reticular
activating system,
cardiorespiratory activity
Limbic system activity and
cardiorespiratory activity
Cortical and corticothalamic
activity and cardiorespiratory
activity
Composed of all interconnected
cells of the body and brain
Types of oscillations
Slow oscillations, delta*
Theta and beta*
Alpha and gamma*
Includes all neural oscillatory
activity as well as oscillatory
activity throughout the body
Dysfunction arising
from damage to layer
Unconsciousness, coma, sleep
disorders, autonomic
dysfunction, etc.
Emotion disorders, amnesia,
panic attacks, etc.
Contralateral neglect, cortical
blindness, sensory dysfunction,
etc.
All illnesses and disorders (this
layer consists of all cells of the
body)
*Disclaimer: this table summarizes the main proposed characteristics of our model; however, this model requires further study to substantiate these proposals.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
20
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
central role of global membrane potential based homeostasis can
also explain how slow deep breathing, such as that practiced
during pranayama and meditation, can lead to autonomic
modulation. For a detailed look at this phenomenon (see Jerath
et al., 2006, 2014c; Jerath and Barnes, 2009). The change in mental
state from a sympathetic stressed state to a parasympathetic
mind-body response is based on total body response with
associated changes in cardiorespiratory, peripheral, and DMN
oscillations (Jerath and Barnes, 2009) (Figures 8, 9). This is likely
a less pronounced but similar mechanism to what occurs during
slow-wave sleep, in which widespread hyperpolarization occurs
throughout the cortex and subcortical structures (Steriade and
Timofeev, 2003; Jerath et al., 2014c).
Conclusion
The most currently accepted consciousness theories oﬀer
insights into consciousness processing but they fail to address
many key aspects of conscious experience. We propose that our
uniﬁed consciousness model addresses these neglected aspects
of consciousness (Table 1). Our model involves the creation of
a neural sensory memory space from oscillatory activity from
the default mode network, other salient networks, spinal cord,
brainstem, and reticular activating system. This idling brain
activity may provide the foundation for an active space that is
ﬁlled-in by the thalamus. We propose that external and internal
sensory information is processed by corticothalamic feedback
loops and projected by the thalamus within a proposed 3D
default space, recreating the external world within the mind.
This 3D default space is composed of all the interconnected cells
of the body, which act as one uniﬁed space (Table 2). Within
this larger intrapersonal space is the neural sensory memory
space in which moment-to-moment subjective experience
occurs, including hallmarks of conscious experience such as
visual imagery, thoughts, and inner speech. Current technology
and current understanding of the brain limit our ability to
verify these consciousness models but rapid advances in the
ﬁeld show promise. Processing by corticothalamic feedback
loops, extremely fast processing times, and the subjective nature
of ﬁrst-person conscious experience make consciousness a
diﬃcult topic to study and pinpoint where, when, and how
consciousness arises. However, comparing neurophysiological
and neuroimaging from minimally contrasted experimental
data of unconscious and conscious processing can inform better
choices for study of objective measures of the emergence
of
conscious
(Dehaene
and
Changeux,
2011).
Dehaene
and Changeux posit “late ampliﬁcation of relevant sensory
activity,
long-distance
cortico-cortical
synchronization
at
beta and gamma frequencies, and “ignition” of a large-scale
prefronto-parietal network” as objective measurements of
conscious access (Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). Neuroimaging
studies on masking and binocular rivalry allow for minimal
experimental diﬀerences between unconscious and conscious
processing to be compared and event-related potentials and
magneto-encephalography are useful for examining temporal
changes on a millisecond scale (Dehaene and Changeux,
2011). Studies examining masking and binocular rivalry and
even-related potentials can give us valuable insights into
processes of consciousness but at this point they cannot
validate or falsify any of the currently accepted consciousness
models. Overall, we have proposed a dynamic global theory
that is indirectly supported by basic and clinical studies;
however, direct studies are needed to elucidate the detailed
underlying mechanisms. Understanding how consciousness
arises would greatly beneﬁt the entire ﬁeld of neuroscience and
provide insights into the diagnosis and treatment of countless
disorders.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Michael Jensen and Linsey Ekema for
creating the ﬁgures used in this manuscript.
References
Aggleton, J. P., and Nelson, A. J. (2014). Why do lesions in the rodent anterior
thalamic nuclei cause such severe spatial deﬁcits? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 54,
131–144. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.08.013
Aggleton, J. P., O’Mara, S. M., Vann, S. D., Wright, N. F., Tsanov, M., and Erichsen,
J. T. (2010). Hippocampal-anterior thalamic pathways for memory: uncovering
a network of direct and indirect actions. Eur. J. Neurosci. 31, 2292–2307. doi:
10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07251.x
Alkire, M. T., and Miller, J. (2005). General anesthesia and the neural
correlates of consciousness. Prog. Brain Res. 150, 229–244. doi: 10.1016/S0079-
6123(05)50017-7
Baars, B. J. (1997). In the Theatre of Consciousness. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Baars, B. J. (2002). The conscious access hypothesis: origins and recent evidence.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 6, 47–52. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01819-2
Baars, B. J. (2003). The global brainweb: an update on global workspace theory. Sci.
Con. Rev. 2.
Baars, B. J. (2005). Global workspace theory of consciousness: toward a
cognitive neuroscience of human experience. Prog. Brain Res. 150, 45–53. doi:
10.1016/S0079-6123(05)50004-9
Baars, B. J., Franklin, S., and Ramsøy, T. Z. (2013). Global workspace dynamics:
cortical “binding and propagation” enables conscious contents. Front. Psychol.
4:200. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00200
Beauchemin, K. M., and Hays, P. (1995). Prevailing mood, mood changes and
dreams in bipolar disorder. J. Aﬀect. Disord. 35, 41–49. doi: 10.1016/0165-
0327(95)00036-M
Birn, R. M., Murphy, K., and Bandettini, P. A. (2008). The eﬀect of
respiration
variations
on
independent
component
analysis
results
of
resting state functional connectivity. Hum. Brain Mapp. 29, 740–750. doi:
10.1002/hbm.20577
Bisiach, E., and Luzzatti, C. (1978). Unilateral neglect of representational space.
Cortex 14, 129–133. doi: 10.1016/S0010-9452(78)80016-1
Bjornstad, B., Goodman, S. H., Sirven, J. I., and Dodick, D. W. (2003). Paroxysmal
sleep as a presenting symptom of bilateral paramedian thalamic infarctions.
Mayo Clin. Proc. 78, 347–349. doi: 10.4065/78.3.347
Bloch, S., Lemeignan, M., and Aguilera, N. (1991). Speciﬁc respiratory patterns
distinguish among human basic emotions. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 11, 141–154.
doi: 10.1016/0167-8760(91)90006-J
Bogacz, R. (2014). “Basal Ganglia: beta oscillations,” in Encyclopedia of
Computational Neuroscience, eds D. Jaeger and R. Jung (New York, NY:
Springer), 1–5.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
21
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
Bogousslavsky, J., Ferrazzini, M., Regli, F., Assal, G., Tanabe, H., and Delaloye-
Bischof, A. (1988). Manic delirium and frontal-like syndrome with paramedian
infarction of the right thalamus. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatr. 51, 116–119.
doi: 10.1136/jnnp.51.1.116
Bosman, C. A., Lansink, C. S., and Pennartz, C. M. (2014). Functions of gamma-
band synchronization in cognition: from single circuits to functional diversity
across cortical and subcortical systems. Eur. J. Neurosci. 39, 1982–1999. doi:
10.1111/ejn.12606
Brindley, G. S. (1962). Two new properties of foveal after-images and a
photochemical hypothesis to explain them. J Physiol 164, 168–179. doi:
10.1113/jphysiol.1962.sp007011
Bruce, B. B., Foote, K. D., Rosenbek, J., Sapienza, C., Romrell, J., Crucian, G.,
et al. (2004). Aphasia and thalamotomy: important issues. Stereotact. Funct.
Neurosurg. 82, 186–190. doi: 10.1159/000082207
Cabeza, R., Kapur, S., Craik, F. I., Mcintosh, A. R., Houle, S., and Tulving,
E. (1997). Functional neuroanatomy of recall and recognition: a PET study
of episodic memory. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 9, 254–265. doi: 10.1162/jocn.1997.
9.2.254
Cartwright, R., Agargun, M. Y., Kirkby, J., and Friedman, J. K. (2006).
Relation of dreams to waking concerns. Psychiatry Res. 141, 261–270. doi:
10.1016/j.psychres.2005.05.013
Chalmers, D. J. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. J. Con. Stud. 2,
200–219.
Chennu, S., Finoia, P., Kamau, E., Allanson, J., Williams, G. B., Monti,
M. M., et al. (2014). Spectral signatures of reorganised brain networks
in disorders of consciousness. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10:e1003887. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003887
Courtiol, E., and Wilson, D. A. (2013). Thalamic olfaction: characterizing odor
processing in the mediodorsal thalamus of the rat. J. Neurophysiol. 111,
1274–1285. doi: 10.1152/jn.00741.2013
Crabtree,
J.
W.
(1999). Intrathalamic
sensory connections
mediated
by
the thalamic reticular nucleus. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 56, 683–700. doi:
10.1007/s000180050462
Crick,
F.
(1984).
Function
of
the
thalamic
reticular
complex:
the
searchlight hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 81, 4586–4590. doi:
10.1073/pnas.81.14.4586
Cudeiro,
J.,
and
Sillito,
A.
M.
(2006).
Looking
back:
corticothalamic
feedback and early visual processing. Trends Neurosci. 29, 298–306. doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2006.05.002
D’Agostino, A., Castelnovo, A., and Scarone, S. (2013). Dreaming and the
neurobiology of self: recent advances and implications for psychiatry. Front.
Psychol. 4:680. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00680
Damasio, A. (1995). Descartes’ Error. London: Picador Vintage.
Damasio, A. R. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the
Making of Consciousness. Orlando, FL: Harcourt.
Danielson, N. B., Guo, J. N., and Blumenfeld, H. (2011). The default mode
network and altered consciousness in epilepsy. Behav. Neurol. 24, 55–65. doi:
10.1155/2011/912720
Dehaene, S., and Changeux, J.-P. (2011). Experimental and theoretical approaches
to conscious processing. Neuron 70, 200–227. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.
03.018
Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Cohen, L., Bihan, D. L., Mangin, J. F., Poline, J. B.,
et al. (2001). Cerebral mechanisms of word masking and unconscious repetition
priming. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 752–758. doi: 10.1038/89551
Del Mar Sáez De Ocariz, M., Nader, J. A., Santos, J. A., and Bautista,
M. (1996). Thalamic vascular lesions: risk factors and clinical course for
infarcts and hemorrhages. Stroke 27, 1530–1536. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.27.
9.1530
Dentico, D., Cheung, B. L., Chang, J. Y., Guokas, J., Boly, M., Tononi,
G., et al. (2014). Reversal of cortical information ﬂow during visual
imagery as compared to visual perception. Neuroimage 100, 237–243. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.081
Di Rocco, C., and Iannelli, A. (2002). Bilateral thalamic tumors in children. Child’s
Nervous Syst. 18, 440–444. doi: 10.1007/s00381-002-0609-9
Doesburg, S. M., Green, J. J., Mcdonald, J. J., and Ward, L. M. (2009).
Rhythms of consciousness: binocular rivalry reveals large-scale oscillatory
network dynamics mediating visual perception. PLoS ONE 4:e6142. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0006142
Dossi, R. C., Nuñez, A., and Steriade, M. (1992). Electrophysiology of a slow (0.5-
4 Hz) intrinsic oscillation of cat thalamocortical neurones in vivo. J. Physiol.
447, 215–234. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1992.sp018999
Earl, B. (2014). The biological function of consciousness. Front. Psychol. 5:697. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00697
Edelman, D. B., Baars, B. J., and Seth, A. K. (2005). Identifying hallmarks of
consciousness in non-mammalian species. Conscious. Cogn. 14, 169–187. doi:
10.1016/j.concog.2004.09.001
Edelman, G. M. (2004). Wider than the Sky: The Phenomenal Gift of Consciousness.
New Haven, NY: Yale University Press.
Engel, A. K., and Fries, P. (2010). Beta-band oscillations—signalling the status quo?
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 156–165. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2010.02.015
Evans, K. C. (2010). Cortico-limbic circuitry and the airways: insights from
functional neuroimaging of respiratory aﬀerents and eﬀerents. Biol. Psychol. 84,
13–25. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2010.02.005
Faivre, N., Mudrik, L., Schwartz, N., and Koch, C. (2014). Multisensory integration
in complete unawareness: evidence from audiovisual congruency priming.
Psychol. Sci. 25, 2006–2016. doi: 10.1177/0956797614547916
Farb, N. A., Segal, Z. V., and Anderson, A. K. (2013). Attentional modulation of
primary interoceptive and exteroceptive cortices. Cereb. Cortex 23, 114–126.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr385
Feldman, J. L., and Del Negro, C. A. (2006). Looking for inspiration: new
perspectives on respiratory rhythm. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 232–242. doi:
10.1038/nrn1871
Fendrich, R., Wessinger, C. M., and Gazzaniga, M. S. (1992). Residual vision
in a scotoma: implications for blindsight. Science 258, 1489–1491. doi:
10.1126/science.1439839
Fernández-Espejo, D., Soddu, A., Cruse, D., Palacios, E. M., Junque, C.,
Vanhaudenhuyse, A., et al. (2012). A role for the default mode network
in the bases of disorders of consciousness. Ann. Neurol. 72, 335–343. doi:
10.1002/ana.23635
Flor, H., Nikolajsen, L., and Staehelin Jensen, T. (2006). Phantom limb pain:
a case of maladaptive CNS plasticity? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 873–881. doi:
10.1038/nrn1991
Foulkes, D. (1999). Children’s Dreaming and the Development of Consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D. C.,
and Raichle, M. E. (2005). The human brain is intrinsically organized into
dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102,
9673–9678. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0504136102
Garcia-Rill, E., Heister, D. S., Ye, M., Charlesworth, A., and Hayar, A. (2007).
Electrical coupling: novel mechanism for sleep-wake control. Sleep 30,
1405–1414.
Garcia-Rill, E., Kezunovic, N., Hyde, J., Simon, C., Beck, P., and Urbano, F. J.
(2013). Coherence and frequency in the reticular activating system (RAS). Sleep
Med. Rev. 17, 227–238. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2012.06.002
Gelabert-González, M., Seramito-Garcia, R., Bandín-Diéguez, J., and Allut, A. G.
(2007). Bilateral thalamic tumours. Three case reports and a review of the
literature. Rev. Neurol. 45, 599–603.
Gray, A. (1982). The Neuropsychology of Anxiety: An Enquiry Into the Septo-
hippocampal System. Oxford: University Press.
Güntekin,
B.,
and
Ba¸sar,
E.
(2010).
Event-related
beta
oscillations
are
aﬀected by emotional eliciting stimuli. Neurosci. Lett. 483, 173–178. doi:
10.1016/j.neulet.2010.08.002
Halassa, M. M., Chen, Z., Wimmer, R. D., Brunetti, P. M., Zhao, S., Zikopoulos, B.,
et al. (2014). State-dependent architecture of thalamic reticular subnetworks.
Cell 158, 808–821. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.025
Halassa, M. M., Siegle, J. H., Ritt, J. T., Ting, J. T., Feng, G., and Moore, C. I. (2011).
Selective optical drive of thalamic reticular nucleus generates thalamic bursts
and cortical spindles. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1118–1120. doi: 10.1038/nn.2880
Heilman, K. M., Watson, R. T., Valenstein, E., and Goldberg, M. E. (1987).
“Attention: behavioral and neural mechanisms,” in Handbook of Physiology-
The Nervous System, ed E. R. Kandel (American Physiological Society by
Wiley-Blackwell), 461–481.
Hiltunen, T., Kantola, J., Abou Elseoud, A., Lepola, P., Suominen, K.,
Starck, T., et al. (2014). Infra-slow EEG ﬂuctuations are correlated with
resting-state network dynamics in fMRI. J. Neurosci. 34, 356–362. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0276-13.2014
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
22
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
Hohwy,
J.
(2009).
The
neural
correlates
of
consciousness:
new
experimental approaches needed? Conscious.
Cogn. 18, 428–438. doi:
10.1016/j.concog.2009.02.006
Holcombe, A. O., Macleod, D. I. A., and Mitten, S. T. (2004). Positive afterimages
caused by a ﬁlled-in representation. J. Vis. 4:485. doi: 10.1167/4.8.485
Holden, C. (1979). Paul MacLean and the triune brain. Science 204, 1066–1068.
doi: 10.1126/science.377485
Holzinger, B., Laberge, S., and Levitan, L. (2006). Psychophysiological correlates of
lucid dreaming. Am. Psychol. Ass. 16, 88–95. doi: 10.1037/1053-0797.16.2.88
Homma, I., and Masaoka, Y. (2008). Breathing rhythms and emotions. Exp.
Physiol. 93, 1011–1021. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2008.042424
Jerath, R., and Barnes, V. A. (2009). Augmentation of mind-body therapy and
role of deep Slow Breathing. J. Comp. Integr. Med. 6:31. doi: 10.2202/1553-
3840.1299
Jerath, R., Barnes, V. A., and Crawford, M. W. (2014a). Mind-body response
and neurophysiological changes during stress and meditation: central role of
homeostasis. J. Biol. Regul. Homeost. Agents 28, 545–554.
Jerath, R., Barnes, V. A., Dillard-Wright, D., Jerath, S., and Hamilton,
B. (2012). Dynamic change of awareness during meditation techniques:
neural and physiological correlates. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6:131. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2012.00131
Jerath, R., and Crawford, M. W. (2014). Neural correlates of visuospatial
consciousness in 3D default space: insights from contralateral neglect
syndrome. Conscious. Cogn. 28, 81–93. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.06.008
Jerath, R., and Crawford, M. W. (2015a). How does the body aﬀect the mind? Role
of cardiorespiratory coherence in spectrum of emotions. Adv. Mind Body Med.
Jerath, R., and Crawford, M. W. (2015b). Layers of human brain activity: a
functional model based on the default mode network and slow oscillations.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 9:248. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.00248
Jerath, R., Crawford, M. W., Barnes, V. A., and Harden, K. (2014b). Widespread
depolarization during expiration: a source of respiratory drive? Med.
Hypotheses 84, 31–37. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2014.11.010
Jerath, R., Crawford, M. W., Barnes, V. A., and Harden, K. (2015a). Self-
Regulation of breathing as a primary treatment for anxiety. Appl. Psychophysiol.
Biofeedback. 40, 107–115. doi: 10.1007/s10484-015-9279-8
Jerath, R., Crawford, M. W., and Jensen, M. (2015b). Etiology of phantom
limb syndrome: insights from a 3D default space consciousness model. Med.
Hypotheses. 85, 153–159. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2015.04.025
Jerath, R., Edry, J. W., Barnes, V. A., and Jerath, V. (2006). Physiology of long
pranayamic breathing: neural respiratory elements may provide a mechanism
that explains how slow deep breathing shifts the autonomic nervous system.
Med. Hypotheses 67, 566–571. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2006.02.042
Jerath, R., Harden, K., Crawford, M., Barnes, V. A., and Jensen, M. (2014c). Role of
cardiorespiratory synchronization and sleep physiology: eﬀects on membrane
potential in the restorative functions of sleep. Sleep Med. 15, 279–288. doi:
10.1016/j.sleep.2013.10.017
Kahan, T. L., and Laberge, S. (1994). Lucid dreaming as metacognition:
implications for cognitive science. Conscious. Cogn. 3, 246–264. doi:
10.1006/ccog.1994.1014
Kay, L. M., and Sherman, S. M. (2007). An argument for an olfactory thalamus.
Trends Neurosci. 30, 47–53. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2006.11.007
Kempton, M. J., Ettinger, U., Foster, R., Williams, S. C., Calvert, G. A., Hampshire,
A., et al. (2011). Dehydration aﬀects brain structure and function in healthy
adolescents. Hum. Brain Mapp. 32, 71–79. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20999
Kerkhoﬀ, G. (2001). Spatial hemineglect in humans. Prog. Neurobiol. 63, 1–27. doi:
10.1016/S0301-0082(00)00028-9
Kilavik, B. E., Zaepﬀel, M., Brovelli, A., Mackay, W. A., and Riehle, A. (2013). The
ups and downs of beta oscillations in sensorimotor cortex. Exp. Neurol. 245,
15–26. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.09.014
Klimesch,
W.
(2012).
alpha-band
oscillations,
attention,
and
controlled
access
to
stored
information.
Trends
Cogn.
Sci.
16,
606–617.
doi:
10.1016/j.tics.2012.10.007
Knyazev, G. G. (2012). EEG delta oscillations as a correlate of basic homeostatic
and motivational processes. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 677–695. doi:
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.10.002
Koch, C., and Tsuchiya, N. (2007). Attention and consciousness: two distinct brain
processes. Trends Cogn Sci 11, 16–22. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2006.10.012
Lam, Y. W., and Sherman, S. M. (2011). Functional organization of the thalamic
input to the thalamic reticular nucleus. J. Neurosci. 31, 6791–6799. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3073-10.2011
Lambertz, M., and Langhorst, P. (1998). Simultaneous changes of rhythmic
organization in brainstem neurons, respiration, cardiovascular system and EEG
between 0.05 Hz and 0.5 Hz. J. Auton. Nerv. Syst. 68, 58–77. doi: 10.1016/S0165-
1838(97)00126-4
Lehmann, D. (2013). “Emergence in dual-aspect monism,” in The Unity of Mind,
Brain and World: Current Perspectives on a Science of Consciousness, eds A.
Jr. Pereira and D. Lehmann (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press),
149–190.
Little, D. M., Kraus, M. F., Joseph, J., Geary, E. K., Susmaras, T., Zhou, X. J., et al.
(2010). Thalamic integrity underlies executive dysfunction in traumatic brain
injury. Neurology 74, 558–564. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181cﬀ5d5
Low, P. (2012). “Consciousness in human and non-human animals,” in The Francis
Crick Memorial Conference (Cambridge, UK).
Lusignan, F. A., Zadra, A., Dubuc, M. J., Daoust, A. M., Mottard, J. P., and
Godbout, R. (2009). Dream content in chronically-treated persons with
schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res. 112, 164–173. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.03.032
Lutkenhoﬀ, E. S., Chiang, J., Tshibanda, L., Kamau, E., Kirsch, M., Pickard, J. D.,
et al. (2015). Thalamic and extrathalamic mechanisms of consciousness after
severe brain injury. Ann Neurol. 78, 68–76. doi: 10.1002/ana.24423
Macdonald, K. D., Fifkova, E., Jones, M. S., and Barth, D. S. (1998). Focal
stimulation of the thalamic reticular nucleus induces focal gamma waves in
cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 79, 474–477.
Magnin, M., Rey, M., Bastuji, H., Guillemant, P., Mauguière, F., and Garcia-
Larrea, L. (2010). Thalamic deactivation at sleep onset precedes that of the
cerebral cortex in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 3829–3833. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909710107
Malhotra, R., Lin, Z., Vincenz, C., and Brosius, F. C. III. (2001). Hypoxia induces
apoptosis via two independent pathways in Jurkat cells: diﬀerential regulation
by glucose. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 281, C1596–C1603.
Marchetti, G. (2014). Attention and working memory: two basic mechanisms
for
constructing
temporal
experiences.
Front.
Psychol.
5:880.
doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00880
Masaoka, Y., and Homma, I. (2000). The source generator of respiratory-
related anxiety potential in the human brain. Neurosci. Lett. 283, 21–24. doi:
10.1016/S0304-3940(00)00895-8
McAlonan, K., Brown, V. J., and Bowman, E. M. (2000). Thalamic reticular nucleus
activation reﬂects attentional gating during classical conditioning. J. Neurosci.
20, 8897–8901.
Melloni, L., Molina, C., Pena, M., Torres, D., Singer, W., and Rodriguez,
E.
(2007).
Synchronization
of
neural
activity
across
cortical
areas
correlates with conscious perception. J. Neurosci. 27, 2858–2865. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4623-06.2007
Mena-Segovia, J., Sims, H. M., Magill, P. J., and Bolam, J. P. (2008). Cholinergic
brainstem neurons modulate cortical gamma activity during slow oscillations.
J. Physiol. 586, 2947–2960. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.153874
Merker, B. (2007). Consciousness without a cerebral cortex: a challenge for
neuroscience and medicine. Behav. Brain Sci. 30, 63–81; discussion 81–134. doi:
10.1017/S0140525X07000891
Merker, B. (2012). “From probabilities to percepts. A subcortical “global best
estimate buﬀer” as locus of phenomenal experience,” in Being in Time:
Dynamical Models of Phenomenal Experience, eds S. Edelman, T. Fekete, and
N. Zach (Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company), 37–79.
Merker, B. (2013). “Body and world as phenomenal contents of the brain’s reality
model,” in The Unity of Mind, Brain and World: Current Perspectives on a
Science of Consciousness, eds A. Jr. Pereira and D. Lehmann (New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press), 7–42.
Min, B.-K. (2010). A thalamic reticular networking model of consciousness. Theor.
Biol. Med. Modell. 7:10. doi: 10.1186/1742-4682-7-10
Monto, S., Palva, S., Voipio, J., and Palva, J. M. (2008). Very slow EEG ﬂuctuations
predict the dynamics of stimulus detection and oscillation amplitudes
in humans. J. Neurosci. 28, 8268–8272. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1910-
08.2008
Mrazek, M. D., Franklin, M. S., Phillips, D. T., Baird, B., and Schooler, J. W.
(2013). Mindfulness training improves working memory capacity and GRE
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
23
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
performance while reducing mind wandering. Psychol. Sci. 24, 776–781. doi:
10.1177/0956797612459659
Mudrik, L., Faivre, N., and Koch, C. (2014). Information integration without
awareness. Trends Cogn. Sci. 18, 488–496. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2014.04.009
Muzur, A., Pace-Schott, E. F., and Hobson, J. A. (2002). The prefrontal cortex in
sleep. Trends Cogn. Sci. 6, 475–481. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(02)01992-7
Nguyen, D. K., and Botez, M. I. (1998). Diaschisis and neurobehavior. Can. J.
Neurol. Sci. 25, 5–12.
Nir, Y., and Tononi, G. (2010). Dreaming and the brain: from phenomenology to
neurophysiology. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 88–100. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.12.001
Northoﬀ, G. (2013). What the brain’s intrinsic activity can tell us about
consciousness? A tri-dimensional view. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37, 726–738.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.12.004
Öngür, D., and Price, J. L. (2000). The organization of networks within the orbital
and medial prefrontal cortex of rats, monkeys and humans. Cereb. Cortex 10,
206–219. doi: 10.1093/cercor/10.3.206
Pendﬁeld, W., and Jasper, H. (1954). Epilepsy and the Functional Anatomy of the
Human Brain. Boston: Little, Brown.
Pergola, G., Ranft, A., Mathias, K., and Suchan, B. (2013). The role of
the thalamic nuclei in recognition memory accompanied by recall during
encoding and retrieval: an fMRI study. Neuroimage 74, 195–208. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.02.017
Persaud, N., and Cowey, A. (2008). Blindsight is unlike normal conscious
vision: evidence from an exclusion task. Conscious. Cogn. 17, 1050–1055. doi:
10.1016/j.concog.2007.10.002
Pierson, D. J. (2000). Pathophysiology and clinical eﬀects of chronic hypoxia.
Respir Care 45, 39-51; discussion 51–33.
Plankar, M., BreŽan, S., and Jerman, I. (2013). The principle of coherence in multi-
level brain information processing. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 111, 8–29. doi:
10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2012.08.006
Pollen,
D.
A.
(2003).
Explicit
neural
representations,
recursive
neural
networks and conscious visual perception. Cereb. Cortex 13, 807–814.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/13.8.807
Poulet, J. F. A., Fernandez, L. M. J., Crochet, S., and Petersen, C. C. H.
(2012). Thalamic control of cortical states. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 370–372. doi:
10.1038/nn.3035
Price, J. L. (1985). Beyond the primary olfactory cortex: olfactory-related areas
in the neocortex, thalamus and hypothalamus. Chem. Senses 10, 239–258. doi:
10.1093/chemse/10.2.239
Price, J. L., and Slotnick, B. M. (1983). Dual olfactory representation in the rat
thalamus: an anatomical and electrophysiological study. J. Comp. Neurol. 215,
63–77. doi: 10.1002/cne.902150106
Purves, D., Augustine, G. J., Fitzpatrick, D., Katz, L., Lamantia, A.-S., Mcnamara,
J. O., et al. (eds.). (2001). “Thalamocortical interactions,” in Neuroscience, 2nd
Edn. (Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates), 618–619.
Raichle, M. E. (2010). Two views of brain function. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 180–190.
doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.008
Raichle, M. E., and Mintun, M. A. (2006). Brain work and brain imaging. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 29, 449–476. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.112819
Raichle, M. E., and Snyder, A. Z. (2007). A default mode of brain function:
a brief history of an evolving idea. Neuroimage 37, 1083–1090. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.02.041
Rainville, P., Bechara, A., Naqvi, N., and Damasio, A. R. (2006). Basic emotions
are associated with distinct patterns of cardiorespiratory activity. Int. J.
Psychophysiol. 61, 5–18. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2005.10.024
Rajput, D. K., Mehrotra, A., Srivastav, A. K., Kumar, R., and Mahapatra, A. K.
(2010). Bilateral thalamic glioma in a 6-year-old child. J. Pediatr. Neurosci. 5,
45–48. doi: 10.4103/1817-1745.66672
Ramachandran, V. S., and Gregory, R. L. (1991). Perceptual ﬁlling in of
artiﬁcially induced scotomas in human vision. Nature 350, 699–702. doi:
10.1038/350699a0
Ramachandran, V. S., and Hirstein, W. (1998). The perception of phantom
limbs.
The
D.
O.
Hebb
lecture.
Brain
121(Pt
9),
1603–1630.
doi:
10.1093/brain/121.9.1603
Ribary, U., Ioannides, A. A., Singh, K. D., Hasson, R., Bolton, J. P., Lado, F.,
et al. (1991). Magnetic ﬁeld tomography of coherent thalamocortical 40-Hz
oscillations in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88, 11037–11041. doi:
10.1073/pnas.88.24.11037
Rogawski, M. A. (2000). KCNQ2/KCNQ3 K+ channels and the molecular
pathogenesis of epilepsy: implications for therapy. Trends Neurosci. 23,
393–398. doi: 10.1016/S0166-2236(00)01629-5
Saez, J. C., Berthoud, V. M., Branes, M. C., Martinez, A. D., and Beyer,
E. C. (2003). Plasma membrane channels formed by connexins: their
regulation and functions. Physiol. Rev. 83, 1359–1400. doi: 10.1152/physrev.
00007.2003
Saper, C. B., Fuller, P. M., Pedersen, N. P., Lu, J., and Scammell, T. E. (2010). Sleep
state switching. Neuron 68, 1023–1042. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.032
Schiﬀ, N. D. (2005). Modeling the minimally conscious state: measurements of
brain function and therapeutic possibilities. Prog. Brain Res. 150, 473–493. doi:
10.1016/S0079-6123(05)50033-5
Schiﬀ, N. D. (2008). Central thalamic contributions to arousal regulation and
neurological disorders of consciousness. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1129, 105–118.
doi: 10.1196/annals.1417.029
Schiﬀ, N. D., Giacino, J. T., Kalmar, K., Victor, J. D., Baker, K., Gerber, M.,
et al. (2007). Behavioural improvements with thalamic stimulation after severe
traumatic brain injury. Nature 448, 600–603. doi: 10.1038/nature06041
Schmahmann, J. D. (2003). Vascular syndromes of the thalamus. Stroke 34,
2264–2278. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000087786.38997.9E
Schmid, M. C., Mrowka, S. W., Turchi, J., Saunders, R. C., Wilke, M., Peters, A. J.,
et al. (2010). Blindsight depends on the lateral geniculate nucleus. Nature 466,
373–377. doi: 10.1038/nature09179
Sela, L., Sacher, Y., Serfaty, C., Yeshurun, Y., Soroker, N., and Sobel, N. (2009).
Spared and impaired olfactory abilities after thalamic lesions. J. Neurosci. 29,
12059–12069. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2114-09.2009
Shah, S. A., and Schiﬀ, N. D. (2010). Central thalamic deep brain stimulation
for cognitive neuromodulation - a review of proposed mechanisms and
investigational studies. Eur. J. Neurosci. 32, 1135–1144. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-
9568.2010.07420.x
Sherman, S. M. (2005). Thalamic relays and cortical functioning. Prog. Brain Res.
149, 107–126. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(05)49009-3
Sherman, S. M., and Guillery, R. W. (2001). Exploring the Thalamus. San Diego:
Academic Press.
Shewmon, D. A., Holmes, G. L., and Byrne, P. A. (1999). Consciousness
in
congenitally
decorticate
children:
developmental
vegetative
state
as self-fulﬁlling prophecy. Dev. Med. Child Neurol. 41, 364–374. doi:
10.1017/S0012162299000821
Shimojo, S., Kamitani, Y., and Nishida, S. (2001). Afterimage of perceptually
ﬁlled-in surface. Science 293, 1677–1680. doi: 10.1126/science.1060161
Somjen, G. (1995). “Electrophysiology of mammalian glial cells in situ,” in
Neuroglia, eds H. Kettenmann and B. Ransom (New York, NY: Oxford UP),
319–331.
Sperandio, I., Lak, A., and Goodale, M. A. (2012). Afterimage size is modulated by
size-contrast illusions. J. Vis. 12:18. doi: 10.1167/12.2.18
Spillmann, L., Otte, T., Hamburger, K., and Magnussen, S. (2006). Perceptual
ﬁlling-in from the edge of the blind spot. Vision Res. 46, 4252–4257. doi:
10.1016/j.visres.2006.08.033
Steriade, M. (1992). Basic mechanisms of sleep generation. Neurology 42, 9–17;
discussion 18.
Steriade, M., Amzica, F., and Contreras, D. (1996). Synchronization of fast (30-
40 Hz) spontaneous cortical rhythms during brain activation. J. Neurosci. 16,
392–417.
Steriade, M., Nuñez, A., and Amzica, F. (1993). A novel slow (< 1 Hz) oscillation
of neocortical neurons in vivo: depolarizing and hyperpolarizing components.
J. Neurosci. 13, 3252–3265.
Steriade, M., and Timofeev, I. (2003). Neuronal plasticity in thalamocortical
networks during sleep and waking oscillations. Neuron 37, 563–576. doi:
10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00065-5
Stogner, S. W., and Payne, D. K. (1992). Oxygen toxicity. Ann. Pharmacother. 26,
1554–1562.
Striedter, G. F. (2002). Brain homology and function: an uneasy alliance. Brain Res.
Bull. 57, 239–242. doi: 10.1016/S0361-9230(01)00692-X
Szelies, B., Herholz, K., Pawlik, G., Karbe, H., Hebold, I., and Heiss, W. D. (1991).
Widespread functional eﬀects of discrete thalamic infarction. Arch. Neurol. 48,
178–182. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1991.00530140072019
Tagliazucchi, E., Behrens, M., and Laufs, H. (2013a). Sleep neuroimaging and
models of consciousness. Front. Psychol. 4:256. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00256
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
24
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204

Jerath et al.
Uniﬁed consciousness model
Tagliazucchi, E., Von Wegner, F., Morzelewski, A., Brodbeck, V., Borisov,
S., Jahnke, K., et al. (2013b). Large-scale brain functional modularity
is reﬂected in slow electroencephalographic rhythms across the human
non-rapid
eye
movement
sleep cycle.
Neuroimage 70, 327–339.
doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.12.073
Tham, W. W., Stevenson, R. J., and Miller, L. A. (2009). The functional role of the
medio dorsal thalamic nucleus in olfaction. Brain Res. Rev. 62, 109–126. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresrev.2009.09.007
Thiagarajan, T. C., Lebedev, M. A., Nicolelis, M. A., and Plenz, D. (2010).
Coherence potentials: loss-less, all-or-none network events in the cortex.
PLoS Biol. 8:e1000278. doi: 10.1371/annotation/668be458-400b-4c19-accf-
34fc543340e2
Thorpe, S., Fize, D., and Marlot, C. (1996). Speed of processing in the human visual
system. Nature 381, 520–522. doi: 10.1038/381520a0
Timofeev, I., Bazhenov, M., Seigneur, J., and Sejnowski, T. (2012). “Neuronal
synchronization and thalamocortical rhythms in sleep, wake and epilepsy,” in
Jasper’s Basic Mechanisms of the Epilepsies, 4th Edn. eds J. L. Noebels, M. Avoli,
M. A. Rogawski, R. W. Olsen, and A. V. Delgado-Escueta (Bethesda, MD:
National Center for Biotechnology Information (US)).
Tononi, G. (2004). An information integration theory of consciousness. BMC
Neurosci. 5:42. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-5-42
Tononi, G. (2008). Consciousness as integrated information: a provisional
manifesto. Biol. Bull. 215, 216–242. doi: 10.2307/25470707
Tononi, G., and Cirelli, C. (2003). Sleep and synaptic homeostasis: a hypothesis.
Brain Res. Bull. 62, 143–150. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2003.09.004
Tononi, G., and Edelman, G. M. (2000). A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter
Becomes Imagination. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Trehub, A. (2007). Space, self, and the theater of consciousness. Conscious. Cogn.
16, 310–330. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2006.06.004
Tyll, S., Budinger, E., and Noesselt, T. (2011). Thalamic inﬂuences on multisensory
integration. Commun. Integr. Biol. 4, 378–381. doi: 10.4161/cib.15222
Uhlhaas, P. J., and Singer, W. (2006). Neural synchrony in brain disorders:
relevance for cognitive dysfunctions and pathophysiology. Neuron 52, 155–168.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.09.020
Urbano, F. J., Leznik, E., and Llinás, R. R. (2007). Modaﬁnil enhances
thalamocortical activity by increasing neuronal electrotonic coupling. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 12554–12559. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0705087104
Valderrama, M., Crépon, B., Botella-Soler, V., Martinerie, J., Hasboun, D.,
Alvarado-Rojas, C., et al. (2012). Human gamma oscillations during slow wave
sleep. PLoS ONE 7:e33477. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033477
Van Der Werf, Y. D., Scheltens, P., Lindeboom, J., Witter, M. P., Uylings, H. B.,
and Jolles, J. (2003). Deﬁcits of memory, executive functioning and attention
following infarction in the thalamus; a study of 22 cases with localised lesions.
Neuropsychologia 41, 1330–1344. doi: 10.1016/S0028-3932(03)00059-9
Van Domburg, P. H., Ten Donkelaar, H. J., and Notermans, S. L. (1996). Akinetic
mutism with bithalamic infarction. Neurophysiological correlates. J. Neurol.
Sci. 139, 58–65. doi: 10.1016/0022-510X(96)00026-3
Van Gaal, S., Ridderinkhof, K. R., Scholte, H. S., and Lamme, V. A. (2010).
Unconscious activation of the prefrontal no-go network. J. Neurosci. 30,
4143–4150. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2992-09.2010
Vanhatalo, S., Palva, J. M., Holmes, M. D., Miller, J. W., Voipio, J., and Kaila,
K. (2004). Infraslow oscillations modulate excitability and interictal epileptic
activity in the human cortex during sleep. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101,
5053–5057. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0305375101
Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Noirhomme, Q., Tshibanda, L. J.-F., Bruno, M.-A., Boveroux,
P., Schnakers, C., et al. (2010). Default network connectivity reﬂects the level
of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients. Brain 133,
161–171. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp313
Verkhratsky, A., and Butt, A. M. (eds.). (2013). “Physiology of astroglia: membrane
potential and ion distribution,” in Glial Physiology and Pathophysiology (Wiley-
Blackwell).
Voss, U., Holzmann, R., Tuin, I., and Hobson, J. A. (2009). Lucid dreaming: a state
of consciousness with features of both waking and non-lucid dreaming. Sleep
32, 1191–1200.
Walz, W. (2000). Role of astrocytes in the clearance of excess extracellular
potassium. Neurochem. Int. 36, 291–300. doi: 10.1016/S0197-0186(99)00137-0
Ward, L. M. (2013). The thalamus: gateway to the mind. Wiley Interd. Rev. 4,
609–622. doi: 10.1002/wcs.1256
Whishaw, I. Q. (1990). “The decorticate rat,” in The Cerebral Cortex of the Rat, eds
B. Kolb and R. C. Tess (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 239–267.
White, N. S., and Alkire, M. T. (2003). Impaired thalamocortical connectivity in
humans during general-anesthetic-induced unconsciousness. Neuroimage 19,
402–411. doi: 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00103-4
Windt, J. M., and Noreika, V. (2011). How to integrate dreaming into
a general theory of consciousness–a critical review of existing positions
and suggestions for future research. Conscious. Cogn. 20, 1091–1107. doi:
10.1016/j.concog.2010.09.010
Wojtecki, L., Petri, D., Elben, S., Hirschmann, J., Yelnik, J., Eickhoﬀ, S., et al.
(2014). Modulation of central thalamic oscillations during emotional-cognitive
processing in chronic disorder of consciousness. Cortex 60, 94–102. doi:
10.1016/j.cortex.2014.09.007
Yassa, M. A., and Reagh, Z. M. (2013). Competitive trace theory: a role for
the hippocampus in contextual interference during retrieval. Front. Behav.
Neurosci. 7:107. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00107
Yuan, H., Zotev, V., Phillips, R., and Bodurka, J. (2013). Correlated slow
ﬂuctuations in respiration, EEG, and BOLD fMRI. Neuroimage 79, 81–93. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.04.068
Yuan, H., Zotev, V., Phillips, R., Drevets, W. C., and Bodurka, J. (2012).
Spatiotemporal dynamics of the brain at rest—exploring EEG microstates as
electrophysiological signatures of BOLD resting state networks. Neuroimage
60, 2062–2072. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.031
Zaidi, Q., Ennis, R., Cao, D., and Lee, B. (2012). Neural locus of color afterimages.
Curr. Biol. 22, 220–224. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.12.021
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2015 Jerath, Crawford and Barnes. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
25
August 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1204
