HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 04 November 2021
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.768459
Edited by:
Colin G. Hales,
The University of Melbourne, Australia
Reviewed by:
Alexander Fingelkurts,
BM-Science, Finland
Joachim Keppler,
Department of Consciousness
Research (DIWISS), Germany
*Correspondence:
Jesse J. Winters
jessew@umich.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Cognitive Neuroscience,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
Received: 31 August 2021
Accepted: 11 October 2021
Published: 04 November 2021
Citation:
Winters JJ (2021) The
Temporally-Integrated Causality
Landscape: Reconciling
Neuroscientiﬁc Theories With the
Phenomenology of Consciousness.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 15:768459.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.768459
The Temporally-Integrated Causality
Landscape: Reconciling
Neuroscientiﬁc Theories With the
Phenomenology of Consciousness
Jesse J. Winters*
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, United States
In
recent
years,
there
has
been
a
proliferation
of
neuroscientiﬁc
theories
of
consciousness. These include theories which explicitly point to EM ﬁelds, notably
Operational Architectonics and, more recently, the General Resonance Theory. In
phenomenological terms, human consciousness is a uniﬁed composition of contents.
These contents are speciﬁc and meaningful, and they exist from a subjective point
of view. Human conscious experience is temporally continuous, limited in content,
and coherent. Based upon those phenomenal observations, pre-existing theories of
consciousness, and a large body of experimental evidence, I derived the Temporally-
Integrated Causality Landscape (TICL). In brief, the TICL proposes that the neural
correlate of consciousness is a structure of temporally integrated causality occurring
over a large portion of the thalamocortical system. This structure is composed of
a large, integrated set of neuronal elements (the System), which contains some
subsystems, deﬁned as having a higher level of temporally-integrated causality than
the System as a whole. Each Subsystem exists from the point of view of the System,
in the form of meaningful content. In this article, I review the TICL and consider
the importance of EM forces as a mechanism of neural causality. I compare the
fundamentals of TICL to those of several other neuroscientiﬁc theories. Using ﬁve major
characteristics of phenomenal consciousness as a standard, I compare the basic tenets
of Integrated Information Theory, Global Neuronal Workspace, General Resonance
Theory, Operational Architectonics, and the Temporo-spatial Theory of Consciousness
with the framework of the TICL. While the literature concerned with these theories tends
to focus on different lines of evidence, there are fundamental areas of agreement. This
means that, in time, it may be possible for many of them to converge upon the truth.
In this analysis, I conclude that a primary distinction which divides these theories is the
feature of spatial and temporal nesting. Interestingly, this distinction does not separate
along the fault line between theories explicitly concerned with EM ﬁelds and those which
are not. I believe that reconciliation is possible, at least in principle, among those theories
that recognize the following: just as the contents of consciousness are distinctions within
consciousness, the neural correlates of conscious content should be distinguishable
from but fall within the spatial and temporal boundaries of the full neural correlates of
consciousness.
Keywords: consciousness, TICL, phenomenology, EM ﬁeld, causality
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
INTRODUCTION
Consciousness, the subjectivity which manifests in the waking
and dreaming brain, is perhaps the greatest mystery in all
of science. The scientific method is a system for establishing
objective matters of fact by the empirical means of observation
and controlled experiment. Up to this point, we have no
objective means for establishing the existence or lack of existence
of a state of consciousness in any system, the human brain
or otherwise. As individual human minds, the contents of
experience are self-evident and undeniable. It is within our
human minds that scientific experiments and explananda have
been contrived. We, the conscious minds of human beings,
make observations, derive predictions, test hypotheses, and draw
conclusions. It is no simple feat to turn the focus from the
materials and forces of the objective world, of which we can
make such observations, back upon the observer. Consciousness
is a subjective experience itself, and only within such an
experience can any observation be made. The challenge faced
by neuroscientific theorists in this domain is to establish, upon
solid evidence, a relationship between conscious events and
objective, physical structures or processes in the brain. Toward
that aim, a large and growing body of neuroscience literature
is making progress. This includes progress in the elucidation
of two major theoretical frameworks: Integrated Information
Theory (IIT) and Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (GNW).
But, serious attention should be extended to include other
established frameworks, such as Operational-Architectonics (O-
A) and Temporo-Spatial Theory of Consciousness (TTC).
In particular, O-A has been making substantial theoretical
progress (Fingelkurts et al., 2019, 2020). Important recent efforts
have been made to compare and contrast a wide range of
consciousness theories (Northoff and Lamme, 2020). Georg
Northoff and his colleagues have been working to establish a
new direction in cognitive neuroscience with a focus on spatial-
temporal dynamics of brain activity (Northoff et al., 2020).
It is my opinion that such a project is of great value for
advancing our understanding of consciousness and cognition.
Here, I extend the process of bringing the Temporally-Integrated
Causality Landscape (TICL) into contact with the larger field.
The first article on the TICL focused on a contrast with IIT
and GNW (Winters, 2020). Beginning from an exploration of
phenomenal human consciousness and its contents, I proposed
the TICL as a framework for the full neural correlate of
consciousness. Here, I revisit the TICL and the phenomenal
features of human consciousness upon which it is based. I
expand upon the TICL, by making its grounding in physics more
explicit and by expanding upon its implications. Subsequently,
I compare the insights of the TICL with a wider scope
of established neuroscientific frameworks, including some of
those (O-A and General Resonance Theory, GRT) which
explicitly invoke electromagnetics (EM). A new consolidation
among theoretical frameworks, upon the grounds of reason
and evidence, might accelerate the progress toward a true
understanding of consciousness as a physical phenomenon in
the universe. With that scientific understanding in hand, we will
be able to establish, with the force of scientific certainty, the
subjectivity or lack of subjectivity inhering in a human brain state
or that of any other physical system.
THE TEMPORALLY-INTEGRATED
CAUSALITY LANDSCAPE
According to the TICL, a distinction can be made between
consciousness as a unified whole and the individual contents
which compose the unity. Thus, a distinction is made between
the System and its Subsystems, which are understood to be
the full neural correlates of consciousness and the content-
specific neural correlates of consciousness, respectively. Figure 1
illustrates the basic structure of the TICL, with the System (A)
represented by a large, light gray circle occupying much of
the cortex and the thalamus. The System is that component of
the thalamocortical brain which exhibits some non-zero level
of temporally-integrated causality (TIC) among all its neuronal
elements. In Figure 1, the level of TIC is shown with the darkness
of the color gray. The System (A) contains the Subsystems (B-
F) which change over time. Figure 1 should be understood as
an illustration of concepts. The Subsystems (B-F) do not reflect
anatomical accuracy. Integration, in the context of TICL, refers
to causal influence in both directions. Thus, integrated elements
are characterized by having causality upon one another over
some timeframe and, therefore, indirect causality upon their own
future state. Among a group of integrated elements, the TIC is the
amount of causal influence over the time that it takes to achieve
it. The System (A) is irreducible in the sense that it only includes
those neuronal elements which are contributing causality and
are subject to effects under the influence of the other neuronal
elements over some period of time. The System alone is
insufficient for consciousness. Evidence of this is provided by
global synchrony as might occur with certain types of epileptic
seizures which co-occur with loss of conscious experience
(Blumenfeld, 2011). The TICL explains this by necessitating
the existence of Subsystems (B-F) within the System for the
consciousness of content. According to the TICL, a Subsystem
is a group of neuronal elements within the System which have a
higher level of TIC than the System-at-large, shown in Figure 1
having darker gray colors. This can occur by alteration of the
numerator (the amount of causality) or the denominator (the
time required) or both. In this way, the activity corresponding to
the Subsystem is nested within the time and space of the System.
Accordingly, the content which is produced by a Subsystem is
nested within the phenomenal time and space produced across
the System. The dynamics of Subsystems provide meaningful
content from the point of view (the dotted arrows) of the
System. These dynamics are illustrated in the figure as changes
in the size and grayness of the nested circles (B-F). For example,
Subsystem B can be seen to change in size and TIC (grayness),
across time. Subsystem E appears only briefly. Subsystem F
appears within the pre-existing Subsystem D. The dotted arrows
are a crude illustration showing that the System (A) is the
point of view upon the Subsystems. Since the Subsystems have
higher TIC than the System, they are experienced in specific
and meaningful ways. The Subsystemic TIC is intrinsic to the
Systemic TIC. In fact, the TICL predicts that the Subsystemic
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
FIGURE 1 | The Structure of the Temporally-Integrated Causality Landscape. (A) The large, light gray circle corresponds to the System, which has a non-zero level
of TIC and covers a substantial area of the thalamus and cortex. Over time, the System persists with little overall change. The dotted arrows are meant to show that
the System is the point of view upon the nested Subsystems. (B–F) The smaller, darker gray circles correspond to Subsystems within the System. (B) This
Subsystem shows a change in size and TIC (darkness of color) over time, with less TIC and spatial extent in the third panel relative to the ﬁrst. (C) This Subsystem
shows a change in size and TIC over time, with higher TIC but smaller spatial extent in the third panel than in the ﬁrst. (D) This Subsystem shows some drift in
position relative to Subsystem (C), over the three panels. In the third panel, it comes to contain a smaller Subsystem (F), which has even higher TIC (darker gray).
(E) This Subsystem appears brieﬂy in the second panel, then disappears again. F, This small Subsystem appears within the spatial domain of Subsystem D. It has a
higher level of TIC (darker gray).
activity is experienced in the form of its geometrical relationship
to the System, in space and time. It is thus directly experienced
as relational meaning (color, shape, size, pitch, tone, good, bad,
painful, strange, scary, sad, interesting, and so on). All neuronal
activities in the thalamocortical system which do not contribute
to sufficiently high TIC to participate in a Subsystem, are
subconscious, background activities. This means that a threshold
for consciousness is built-in to the functional organization of the
thalamocortical brain.
The brain is a material structure composed of interconnected
neurons. Subcellular components, such as axons, dendrites,
and pre- and post-synaptic specializations are subject to local
causal influences. An important clarification is needed in order
to advance the scientific search for consciousness in terms
of fundamental physics: Causality requires force. We tend to
discuss neuronal function in terms of the movement of charged
particles and the interactions of molecules. For example, we
understand that sodium, potassium, and chloride ions, moving
across the cell membrane, are responsible for the polarization
and depolarization of the cell. We know that ion movement
across the lipid bilayer requires protein channels, such as voltage-
gated sodium channels. However, less discussed in the context
of neuronal function is the fundamental force by means of
which ions make a difference, namely, the electromagnetic (EM)
force (Lorentz Force). There are four fundamental forces in
physics: the strong force and the weak force which govern
interactions within the atom, the gravitational force, and EM.
Ions, biomolecules, and other material substances (composed
of atoms) exhibit direct causality upon one another by means
of EM forces. Thus, the TICL suggests that the temporally-
integrated causality of the System and its Subsystems refers to
a complex arrangement of electromagnetic fields. Care should
be taken to avoid a naïve conception of nested EM fields
in the brain. The thalamocortical brain is a complex system,
and human phenomenal consciousness is complex as well.
Ultimately, we should expect simple, fundamental principles to
underlie consciousness as a phenomenon in the universe. Thus,
the study of human consciousness by experimentation poses
challenges for deriving those principles. The brain is essentially
an EM field system, so the physical measurements we make
will inevitably involve the interactions of the EM field. This is
the same for all neuroscientific theories. However TIC becomes
formulated, in terms of fundamental physics, its empirical
verification will be achieved through measurements of EM field
properties at a spatial and temporal resolution appropriate to the
System and its Subsystems. It would be a mistake to overcommit
to a physical formalization of the TICL too early in its theoretical
development. Without a doubt, this presents a limitation for
distinguishing among frameworks, by experimentation. But, the
purpose of this work is not to describe the winning theory
in a competition. The purpose is to advance our theoretical
understanding of consciousness and to be positively influential
in the collaborative process of discovery.
The TICL framework assumes that consciousness of contents
is an emergent property of a sufficiently complex system;
consciousness of contents requires a unified structure of causality
with differentiated structures of causality contained within it.
The TICL suggests that a unified (and sustained) thalamocortical
EM field structure must co-exist with nested and dynamic
Subsystemic EM field structures in order for consciousness to
emerge. In contrast to IIT, integration among components of a
structure is not predicted to correlate with consciousness, unless
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
there are subsets of components with higher levels of integration
to be appreciated by the wider structure. Thus, a physically-
nested arrangement is necessary, according to the TICL, for the
consciousness of contents. In IIT, consciousness is assumed to
be intrinsic to, and limited to, that portion of thalamocortical
activity which exhibits maximum causal integration over a
discrete timeframe. According to the TICL, there is a distinction
between an overarching thalamocortical structure, necessary for
consciousness, and embedded thalamocortical structures which
are necessary for conscious contents. In IIT, the portion of
thalamocortical activity which correlates to consciousness, exists
to itself, intrinsically. According to the TICL, the portion of
thalamocortical activity which corresponds to conscious content
(the Subsystems), exists from the point of view of a larger
portion of thalamocortical activity (the System). Subsystemic
activities are intrinsic to and meaningful within the System
(Winters, 2020). In physical terms, the EM fields which compose
Subsystemic structure of causality are nested, in space and time,
within the EM field complex which composes the Systemic
structure of causality. While this description is reminiscent
of dualism, the TICL is explicitly monistic; the contents of
consciousness are parts of, or disturbances in, the conscious
mind. In an arrangement such as the waking thalamocortical
brain, a very large quantity of EM field interactions can occur
within the boundaries of the System. The TICL assumes that the
integration of causality in time is the key to consciousness. This
understanding of causality is not limited to or specific to EM
forces. It may be that EM forces are those that are relevant to
consciousness as exhibited by the brain, but, in principle, any
structure of causality exhibiting both a System and Subsystems
could be conscious. The TICL is an attempt to account for
consciousness as emergent from the human brain, but it does not
rule out consciousness in other systems instantiating the same
principles.
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF HUMAN
CONSCIOUSNESS
A robust theory of human consciousness should provide
an explanation for the self-evident characteristics of human
experience. Again, Nagel defined being conscious as ‘‘there is
something that it is like to be’’ (Nagel, 1974). So, what is it
like? Phenomenologically, human consciousness is: (1) unified
and compositional; its contents are (2) specific and meaningful;
and (3) they exist from a subjective point of view. Human
consciousness is (4) temporally continuous; and (5) limited and
coherent.
Consciousness Is a Uniﬁed Composition of
Contents
First, consciousness is a unified composition of contents (Koch,
2004). Human consciousness always has content. This is what
distinguishes conscious states from nonconscious ones. Even if
one is totally confused, the particular quality of that confusion
of thoughts or sensations is content. Any given experience
contains lots of different identifiable contents, such as a visual
scene composed of objects arranged in space, sounds and smells,
thoughts and feelings. From a subjective point of view, all of these
occur in a common, unified experience. We know that auditory
and visual stimuli, language comprehension, and feelings of
pressure or vibration on the skin, are all processed by different
networks in the cerebral cortex. Moreover, the sense of self can be
disrupted or made absent pharmacologically, while preserving a
unified composition of contents (Millière et al., 2018; Fingelkurts
et al., 2020). The neural correlates of conscious unity are
thought to involve functional integration, synchrony, or rapid
communication in the thalamocortical system, encompassing a
range of cortical regions involved in specialized areas of sensory
and cognitive conscious contents.
Conscious Contents Are Speciﬁc and
Meaningful
Second, conscious contents are specific and meaningful (Koch,
2004; Koch et al., 2016). A certain sound is different from
another sound. A certain thought or feeling is different from
any other thought or feeling. Green is different from blue, etc.
In the scheme of conscious contents, some things are more
alike than others. When we say that consciousness is the fact
that ‘‘it is like something’’, we are referring to the specific
and meaningful contents of experience (Nagel, 1974). Since
individual contents are distinguishable and, at least in principle,
describable, a complete theory of human consciousness must
explain the differentiation among structures or processes that
makes this possible. The neural correlates of specific conscious
contents are thought to involve differentiation of thalamocortical
network functions, occurring during conscious states. These
differentiated, modular activities should be nested within the
spatial boundaries of the full neural correlate of consciousness.
Conscious Contents Exist From a
Subjective Point of View
Third, conscious contents exist from a point of view. This is
subjectivity. Whatever content is being experienced, it is only
being experienced within that conscious entity, from that point
of view. If there is no point of view to observe content, then
there is no consciousness. This is directly related to unity. If
no common structure or process integrates the contents, then
there is no common point of view, and thus, no conscious
entity. From the point of view of the conscious subject, contents
exist and have meaning. Interestingly, even absent a concept of
self, the point of view is implied by the existence of content
experiences under high-dose psychedelics (Millière et al., 2018;
Fingelkurts et al., 2020). This is also true in the case of illusions
involving disembodiment or autoscopy (Blanke and Metzinger,
2009). The point of view should, therefore, not be confused with
self-consciousness.
The
subjective
nature
of
consciousness
is
currently
inexplicable
to
experimentation,
and
thus
requires
a
philosophical consideration in addition to an empirical one.
This is in evidence in the ‘‘Unfolding Argument’’, which
makes the case that any recurrent computation (input-output
relationship) can be achieved by a different, larger feedforward
computation (Doerig et al., 2019). Thus, the authors argue
that causal structure theories such as ITT (and the TICL) are
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
either falsified or non-scientific. Falsification would occur if
causal structure theorists allowed that feedforward structures
of causality could be conscious (Doerig et al., 2019). Given that
Doerig et al. limit the scientific evidence for consciousness to
the subjective report of content, it appears to be impossible
to determine whether any other person or thing is conscious.
Rene Descartes grounded his philosophy in the undeniable
fact of his own consciousness. Descartes wrote, ‘‘. . .this truth,
I think hence I am, was so certain and of such evidence, that
no ground of doubt, however extravagant, could be alleged by
the skeptics capable of shaking it, I concluded that I might,
without scruple accept it as the first principle of the philosophy
of which I was in search’’ (Descartes, 1912). Citing Descartes,
Tononi and colleagues suggest, axiomatically, that conscious
experience exists intrinsically, which is to say it exists to itself
(Tononi et al., 2016). In my opinion, this is a misunderstanding
that leads to errors in IIT. In describing himself as a ‘‘thinking
thing’’, Descartes is not necessitating that he, the thing with
thoughts, and the thoughts which he is thinking are one and the
same thing. It seems apparent to me, following Descartes, that
the thoughts are intrinsic to the thinker, or ‘‘thinking thing’’
that is conscious. Descartes infers his own existence from that
of his thoughts. In fact, he does not exist to himself. Rather, his
thoughts exist to him. In recognition of this, the TICL posits that
the Systemic TIC is aware of the existence of its Subsystemic
TICs. The latter are intrinsic to the former. Thus, we see and
feel and think about contents, but we can only infer our own
existence from those contents. It is rare for neuroscientific
theories of consciousness to explicitly address the point of view.
However, ultimately, the point of view is what we are seeking to
explain.
Consciousness Is Temporally Continuous
Fourth, consciousness is temporally continuous (Wittmann,
2011; Winters, 2020; Kent and Wittmann, 2021). John Searle
defined consciousness as ‘‘those states of sentience and awareness
that typically begin when we awake from a dreamless sleep
and continue until we go to sleep again, or fall into a
coma or die or otherwise become unconscious’’ (Searle,
1997). Phenomenologically, we experience no borders between
subsequent experiences. In ‘‘The Principles of Psychology’’
(1890) William James said, ‘‘Consciousness does not appear to
itself chopped up in bits. Such words as ‘‘chain’’ or ‘‘train’’ do
not describe it fitly as it presents itself in the first instance.
It is nothing jointed; it flows. A ‘‘river’’ or a ‘‘stream’’ are
the metaphors by which it is most naturally described. In
talking of it hereafter, let us call it the stream of thought,
of consciousness, or of subjective life’’. James recognized that,
within a conscious experience, we observe change occurring in
a non-discrete, but continuous manner. This may reflect the
nestedness of qualitative contents occurring at different temporal
scales (Fingelkurts et al., 2010). Whether this necessitates a
non-discrete mechanistic correlate in the brain remains a matter
of contention (Fingelkurts et al., 2010; Kent et al., 2019; Winters,
2020; Kent and Wittmann, 2021). Nevertheless, contents are
dynamic and consciousness seems to flow over an extended sense
of the present (Poppel, 1997; Kent et al., 2019).
Consciousness Is Limited and Coherent
Finally, consciousness is limited and coherent. At any given
time, most things that could be conscious are not. While the
conscious composition contains many simultaneous contents,
incoming sensory data streams are mostly unnoticed. Thus,
only limited content is subjectively accessible (Dehaene and
Changeux, 2011). The contents of consciousness are limited to a
subset, and this suggests a threshold for perception. Furthermore,
only a single interpretation of contents exists from our point of
view at any one time (Blake and Logothetis, 2002; Tsuchiya and
Koch, 2005; Imamoglu et al., 2012). This is well demonstrated
by visual illusions such as the Necker cube, and by binocular
rivalry. The neural correlates of limited conscious content are
studied using contrastive analysis at liminal thresholds for
perception.
These five phenomenal aspects are derived from human
consciousness. We have no way of knowing whether they are
fundamental to consciousness itself. The TICL attempts to
explain human phenomenal consciousness as a landscape of
nested EM field structures. The neural correlates of human
consciousness have evolved over millennia, and do not provide
insight into the simplest, most primitive, modes of conscious
being. Further, there is debate among theorists as to what
the key phenomenal features of human consciousness are. The
five axioms of IIT overlap with those presented here, but
they are distinguishable at least in the case of intrinsicality
and exclusion (Tononi et al., 2016; Winters, 2020). With
respect to intrinsicality, an area of contention among current
frameworks, often implicitly, is the view that consciousness
is one thing altogether and intrinsic to itself (Tononi et al.,
2016) rather than one thing containing many nested things
intrinsic to and differentiated within it (Fingelkurts et al.,
2010, 2013; Northoff and Huang, 2017; Winters, 2020). It
is my view, that the latter is a closer approximation to the
phenomenal human experience. It is often unclear where
a theoretical framework falls on this question. The TICL
explicitly accounts for the point of view as being that of the
wider, integrated System upon its internal dynamics (Winters,
2020). With respect to exclusion, IIT posits that conscious
experience has one, definite spatial and temporal grain (Tononi
et al., 2016), which contrasts with the view that human
consciousness is temporally continuous with dynamic contents
nested within it (Fingelkurts et al., 2010, 2013; Wittmann, 2011;
Northoff and Huang, 2017; Winters, 2020; Kent and Wittmann,
2021).
My goal in developing the TICL was to establish a framework
in which the phenomenal aspects of human consciousness are
in parsimonious agreement with their neural (and ultimately
physical) correlates. I suggest that the five fundamental features
of human consciousness named above require a general
physical model of consciousness to take the form of a single,
integrated thalamocortical structure corresponding to the state
of consciousness, within which differentiated neural activities
are nested in space and time, with the limitation and coherence
of conscious contents depending on the perceived distinction
between background and the differentiated ensembles from the
point of view of the unified structure, and with the meaning being
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
intrinsic to the relationship among neural activities from that
point of view (Winters, 2020).
The
TICL
posits
a
general
explanation
for
the
five
fundamental aspects of phenomenal consciousness I have
presented. Human consciousness is a unified composition of
contents because the Subsystems occur within the unified
(physically integrated) System. The contents of consciousness
are specific because the Subsystems are composed of specific
neuronal elements and their specific TIC. They are meaningful
because of their relationship to one another and to the System.
The contents exist from the point of view of the System. The
System remains largely unchanged in spatial and temporal terms,
but it persists in time (temporal continuity) as Subsystems
appear, change, and disappear within it, in their own time.
Finally, the TICL is limited by the necessity of Subsystems
to have a higher level of TIC than the System, making them
distinguishable from background noise, and thus meaningful to
the System. Coherence is achieved because Subsystems cannot
have more than one form (meaning) at the same time, from
the Systemic point of view. Like other leading neuroscientific
theories, the TICL is consistent with a large body of experimental
evidence.
THE NEURAL CORRELATES OF
CONSCIOUSNESS IN BRIEF REVIEW
The mammalian brain sustains states of consciousness during
wakefulness and dreaming sleep, but these are abbreviated by
states of nonconsciousness during non-dreaming sleep. This
state-change requires enabling factors centered in the brainstem
and acting widely across the rest of the brain (Parvizi and
Damasio, 2001). During conscious states, whether waking or
dreaming, cortical EEG shows asynchronous, high-frequency
activity (Siclari et al., 2017). Spontaneous oscillations in the
cortical EEG occur when a large number of neurons are acting
in concert (Steriade et al., 1990). These EEG rhythms are
classically distinguished as delta (1–3 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), alpha
(9–12 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz), and gamma (>30 Hz). It has
been suggested that synchronization of neuronal activity, in the
gamma frequency band, enables temporal coordination between
the large number of inputs and the resulting outputs (Fries,
2015). Such synchronized oscillations co-exist in the brain with
arrhythmic scale-free activities in which subsets of neurons fire
in synchrony but not in a periodic fashion (Freeman, 2005;
Thivierge and Cisek, 2008; Milstein et al., 2009). The scale-free
dynamics of human brain activity, in EEG, are characterized by
considerable nesting of frequencies (He et al., 2010). The phase of
lower frequencies modulates the amplitude of higher frequency
neuronal activities (He et al., 2010) in a manner known as cross-
frequency coupling, in which small, local populations of neurons
are influenced by the low-frequency oscillations occurring over
larger populations (Bragin et al., 1995; Canolty et al., 2006;
Canolty and Knight, 2010; Aru et al., 2015). Cross-frequency
coupling has been suggested to be involved in information
exchange and cognitive processes (Tort et al., 2009; Axmacher
et al., 2010; Canolty and Knight, 2010; Lisman and Jensen, 2013).
The contents of consciousness are generally understood to be
generated by activity limited to a large portion of the cerebral
cortex and the thalamus (Koch et al., 2016; Tononi et al.,
2016). Primary cortical structures, such as V1, do not directly
contribute to consciousness (Weiskrantz, 1996; Lamme and
Roelfsema, 2000; He and MacLeod, 2001; Jiang et al., 2007).
The cortex is very complex, but it is orderly, with hierarchical
processing of incoming data streams from primary modules
to higher, association modules. Network modules are subsets
of neurons or neuronal groups that are highly connected to
one another (Bassett and Sporns, 2017). These overlapping and
non-overlapping subsets of nodes in the network are strongly
connected to one another but only weakly connected to the
wider network (Sporns and Betzel, 2016). Highly connected
brain networks along the midline have been described as
connector hubs with widespread regional connections by means
of cortico-cortical axonal pathways (Hagmann et al., 2008).
Modulation across different anatomical networks is arranged
hierarchically (Sadaghiani et al., 2010). Dynamic changes in
synchrony might drive the capacity for groups of neurons to
coalesce into functionally connected ensembles (Fries, 2015).
Interestingly, a hierarchy of timescales has been described,
noting that association areas, further along a sensory pathway
become selectively activated with stimuli that are coherent
over longer time periods (Hasson et al., 2008; Murray et al.,
2014). In the spatial domain, such hierarchies are apparent
in the visual system, in which receptive field sizes increase
along the visual pathway. A hierarchy of timescales may be
involved in functional specialization across the cortex (Buzsáki
and Draguhn, 2004; Murray et al., 2014). Often no direct
structural connection is apparent between populations, though
they function coherently with one another (Honey et al.,
2009). Accordingly, long-range relationships among spatially
distributed regions, have been discovered (Sporns and Betzel,
2016). Examples include the frontoparietal control network
and the default mode network (Power et al., 2011). States
of nonconsciousness are characterized by reduced functional
connectivity across the cerebral cortex and a loss in the
diversity of connected configurations (Mashour and Hudetz,
2018).
Christof Koch distinguishes the full neural correlates of
consciousness (NCC) and the content-specific neural correlates
of consciousness (content-specific NCC; Crick and Koch,
1998; Koch et al., 2016). The former (NCC) are the total
necessary and sufficient activities in the brain for the production
of consciousness, without regard to particular contents. The
content-specific NCC refers to the total necessary and sufficient
neural activities for the production of consciousness with a given
piece of content (Koch et al., 2016). Distributed neural activities
across the cerebral cortex are unified by means of functional
integration (Massimini et al., 2005; Boly et al., 2012; Hudetz,
2012; King et al., 2013; Monti et al., 2013; Marinazzo et al., 2014;
Tagliazucchi and Laufs, 2014; Tononi et al., 2016; Mashour and
Hudetz, 2018). This has been proposed to depend on re-entry,
recurrent loops or feedback communication between cortical
regions (Tononi and Edelman, 1998; Lamme and Roelfsema,
2000; Dehaene and Naccache, 2001; Supèr et al., 2001; Dehaene
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
and Changeux, 2011; Oizumi et al., 2014). An alternative
mechanism for integration is EM resonance (Hunt and Schooler,
2019).
Ongoing neural activity across the thalamocortical system
occurs at a range of spatial and temporal scales (Sadaghiani
et al., 2010). Distinct frequency bands are modulated over
time with a predominance of slow-wave activity (Leopold
et al., 2003; Nir et al., 2008). Higher frequency activity is
nested into the infra-slow fluctuations, which occur at less
than 0.1 Hz (He et al., 2010). These especially slow oscillations
occur over long cortical distances with wide spatial coherence
even across cerebral hemispheres (Leopold et al., 2003; Nir
et al., 2008). Ongoing, slow fluctuations have also been
observed in fMRI, with coherence across wide ranges providing
evidence for functional connectivity (Shmuel and Leopold,
2008).
The content-specific NCC can be studied in laboratory
settings using controlled, sensory stimuli. It has largely been
accomplished utilizing report-based visual paradigms and has
identified the involvement of both frontal and parietal regions
(Breitmeyer and Ogmen, 2000; Blake and Logothetis, 2002;
Tsuchiya and Koch, 2005; Imamoglu et al., 2012). Similar
studies which avoid overt reports of perception suggest that
the content-specific NCC are limited to only posterior cortical
regions (Frässle et al., 2014; Tsuchiya et al., 2015). The matter
is far from settled and probably depends upon experimental
approaches and phenomenal definitions as much as it does upon
contradictory evidence. The results of transcranial magnetic
stimulation studies with EEG in conscious and non-conscious
subjects are strongly suggestive of differential oscillations across
space being a specific feature of the conscious state (Massimini
et al., 2005; Sarasso et al., 2015). The idea that both large-scale
integration and smaller-scale differentiation are necessary for
the consciousness of content may have first been recognized
in the Dynamic Core Hypothesis (Tononi and Edelman, 1998).
Neuronal oscillations temporally link neurons into ensembles
by means of synchrony (Buzsáki and Draguhn, 2004). Local
synchrony at high frequencies may bind features of conscious
percepts together but it also occurs among groups of neurons
in cases where stimuli are not consciously perceived (Ray and
Maunsell, 2010; Pitts et al., 2014; Hermes et al., 2015). Temporo-
spatial nestedness has been proposed to correlate with the neural
predisposition to the consciousness of stimuli (Northoff and
Huang, 2017).
Experiments have shown that increased phase synchrony
over long distances, in the cortex, correlates with conscious
perception of stimuli (Gross et al., 2004; Gaillard et al.,
2009). Localized increases in gamma power and synchrony
are seen even with stimuli that are not consciously perceived,
particularly within the first 200 ms (Melloni et al., 2007; Ray
and Maunsell, 2010). Despite this, most theoretical frameworks
for consciousness limit the temporal aspects of consciousness
to a few hundred ms timescales (Northoff and Lamme, 2020;
Kent and Wittmann, 2021). Phenomenologically, it has been
suggested that the experienced present moment is actually
occurring over a wider temporal window in which the
contents of consciousness are integrated (Poppel, 1997; Kent
et al., 2019; Kent and Wittmann, 2021). A large number
of studies have shown that the brain’s spontaneous activity
during conscious states, prior to an experimental stimulus,
is relevant to the resulting conscious content (Northoff and
Huang, 2017). With weak stimuli (just at threshold), the
presentation of which will sometimes result in perception and
sometimes not, within the same subject, baseline, or resting
state, activity as measured by fMRI, positively correlates with
conscious perception (Boly et al., 2007; Hesselmann et al.,
2008; Ploner et al., 2010; Qin et al., 2016). Furthermore,
the phase of the cortical alpha rhythm, measured by EEG
is also predictive of whether a stimulus will be perceived,
with significantly lower detection of the stimulus during the
trough of the alpha band than during the peak (Mathewson
et al., 2009). It was shown, using magnetoencephalography
(MEG), that pre-stimulus alpha fluctuations predict the capacity
to
visually
discriminate
(Van
Dijk
et
al.,
2008).
These
findings are consistent with the idea that temporal alignment
between background oscillations and stimulus-driven activities
determines whether stimuli are consciously perceived (Northoff
and Huang, 2017). A further temporal feature of conscious
perception is informed by visual studies on ‘‘masking’’. Brief
visual stimuli which, presented by themselves, are perceived
by the subject, can be rendered unperceived by spatially and
temporally adjacent stimuli (‘‘masks’’) even when they are
presented after the initial stimulus (Breitmeyer and Ogmen,
2000; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). This suggests that
conscious contents are not evaluated in immediate sequence, but
according to a wider temporal window (Kent and Wittmann,
2021).
Rather than disputing the credibility of these experimental
results, theories of consciousness differ in their interpretation
of them and preferentially address certain areas of evidence.
I described five aspects of phenomenology that characterize
human
consciousness.
I
said
that
human
phenomenal
consciousness is: (1) unified and compositional; its contents are
(2) specific and meaningful; and (3) they exist from a subjective
point of view. Consciousness is (4) temporally continuous; and
(5) limited and coherent. Thus, differing theoretical frameworks
can be distinguished by their particular explanations for these
phenomenal features. A variety of theoretical frameworks have
proliferated recently, and different aspects of consciousness
explored using different experimental methods might account,
in large part, for the discrepancies among them (Northoff
and Lamme, 2020). Neuroscientific theories of consciousness
contrast along multiple dimensions. For better or worse, the
recent proliferation of theories has often meant differing
vocabularies to describe overlapping or identical concepts. It is,
thus, worth attempting to distill the fundamental ideas presented
by the theorists in order to undertake their comparison. This
leads to an imperfect but useful mapping of the relations among
concepts that make up the theories. Entrenched theorists risk
talking past one another. It is my hope that following the
expansion of theoretical models, an evidence-based convergence
will ultimately take hold as the field matures. Therefore, I will
take a reconciliatory approach as well as a discriminating one, in
this discussion.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
THE FUNDAMENTALS OF
NEUROSCIENTIFIC THEORIES OF
CONSCIOUSNESS
Integrated Information Theory
Integrated Information Theory (IIT) begins with a set of axioms,
or self-evident phenomenal facts about consciousness, and
derives postulates about the physical substrate of consciousness.
In brief, these are the axiom of intrinsicality, the axiom of
composition, the axiom of information, the axiom of integration,
and the axiom of exclusion (Tononi et al., 2016). There is
considerable overlap between these axioms and the five aspects
of consciousness that I have highlighted in the present article.
Reasoning from these axioms, IIT predicts that the physical
substrate of consciousness must be the maximum of intrinsic
cause-effect power in the thalamocortical system (Tononi et al.,
2016). According to IIT, conscious entities are not temporally
or spatially nested structures. Rather consciousness is intrinsic
to the system of elements across which the maximum of cause-
effect power is occurring, given a time constant, at or around
200 ms (Tononi et al., 2016). Thus, for IIT, the unified conscious
mind is a single, discrete structure of integrated information
with the content of the whole specified by the structure (Tononi
et al., 2016). Dynamic, nested Subsystems are excluded from
consciousness, though more than one conscious entity might
share the brain at a given time in a non-spatially-overlapping
arrangement (Oizumi et al., 2014). I predict that the maximal
cause-effect power over a set of neuronal elements at a given
timescale in the thalamocortical system might correspond to its
most salient content at the moment of measurement, rather than
capturing consciousness with all of its ongoing content.
Global Neuronal Workspace Theory
Global Neuronal Workspace (GNW) posits that ‘‘conscious
access’’ is a means by which information is widely spread through
the cerebral cortex (Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). This is
suggested to occur by means of delayed amplification of sensory
network activity, which leads to long-range synchronization
in beta and gamma frequencies (Dehaene and Changeux,
2011). Once access has been achieved and communication is
occurring across the ‘‘global workspace’’, information becomes
unified into a common conscious mind (Seth et al., 2005).
According to GNW, cortical pyramidal neurons and their
related thalamocortical loops are functionally interconnected
to form a ‘‘global workspace’’. Reciprocal connections among
local, specialized modules enable contents to be united into a
common structure (Baars, 2005; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011).
GNW theorists call this communication a broadcast because it
spreads information from, for example, parietal and temporal
modules to prefrontal cortical ones, and subsequently makes
cognitive recognition and verbal report possible (Dehaene and
Naccache, 2001; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). ‘‘Conscious
access’’ provides a threshold mechanism for unconscious neural
events to be made conscious. It would appear that this may be
consistent with nestedness in space and time, even if the idea has
not been claimed explicitly.
General Resonance Theory
According
to
General
Resonance
Theory
(GRT),
shared
resonance, an idea related to functional coherence, combines
micro-conscious entities into macro-conscious ones (Hunt and
Schooler, 2019). Despite the panpsychist framing of GRT, the
existence of micro-conscious entities is not dissimilar from the
claim, made by IIT theorists, that structures which exhibit some
measure of integrated information, no matter how small its
manifestation, may have some level of consciousness (Tononi
and Koch, 2015). Similarly, the concept of ‘‘conscious access’’,
in GNW, while not explicitly an answer to the combination
problem, points to a parallel problem of unified consciousness
(Dehaene et al., 2014). How do distal networks communicate
across the brain, toward the production of conscious contents?
The answer, for GRT, lies in the synchronization of their
activities into a common system. Its proponents suggest that
the brain’s EM fields make this resonance possible (Hunt and
Schooler, 2019). They point to a hierarchy of resonances in
the brain, in accordance with varying oscillations in the brain
occurring on a background of non-oscillating, low-frequency
activity (Steinke and Galan, 2011). Resonance, or synchrony,
among neural populations is proposed to be driven by electrical
fields. Despite this mechanistic novelty, the GRT says that
‘‘dominant consciousness’’, the conscious entity exhibited as the
human mind, is unified by synchrony into a single system (Hunt
and Schooler, 2019). It follows that the contents of ‘‘dominant
consciousness’’ are intrinsic to it, much as the maximum of the
cause-effect power structure of IIT. Hunt and Schooler propose
that a phase transition occurs to facilitate the efficient, high-speed
flow of information, reminiscent of the ‘‘ignition’’ discussed in
GNW. The content of consciousness is spatially determined by
the set of neurons which are in resonance. Even though the
theory allows for nested micro-conscious entities occurring at
multiple causal speeds, it is unclear if GRT allows for multiple
different resonances to co-exist in the ‘‘dominant consciousness’’.
I have been arguing that the contents of consciousness are nested
within the conscious System, with independent Subsystemic
dynamics and independent Subsystemic synchronies. If GRT
lacks multiple-resonance-frequency dynamics, this idea appears
to contrast with GRT as completely as it does with IIT.
Operational Architectonics
Operational
Architectonics
(A-O)
purports
that
unified
consciousness is achieved by means of a dynamic, nested
hierarchy of electromagnetic fields in the brain (Fingelkurts
et al., 2010, 2019). An internal physical space-time (IPST)
reorganizes and processes signals from the outside world,
external physical space-time (EPST), turning those streams of
data into dynamic, volumetric spatial-temporal patterns of local
extracellular electric fields (Fingelkurts et al., 2010). These EM
fields, or operational modules, exhibit intrinsic phenomenal
character. This amounts to a virtual world for the subject
known as phenomenal space-time (PST; Fingelkurts et al., 2019).
Short–term patterns of integrated activity occur within the IPST
and become unified within the PST (Fingelkurts et al., 2010).
This framework is undeniably one of nestedness. Assemblies of
neurons take in energy over time, which is suggested to suddenly
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
offload entropy by means of a rapid transitional process, which
then reorganizes the whole system and allows the intermittent
emergence of new content in PST (Fingelkurts et al., 2013).
There is a recognition of dynamic content occurring within a
wider frame of nested assemblies (thus nested EM fields), which
suggests a high degree of reconcilability with the TICL.
Temporo-spatial Theory of Consciousness
The Temporo-spatial Theory of Consciousness (TTC) frames
the problem of consciousness in terms of four dimensions, or
aspects, and offers a set of solutions (Northoff and Huang, 2017).
These are: (1) the level or state of consciousness; (2) the content
or form of consciousness; (3) phenomenology or experience;
and (4) cognitive processing and report. First, the level or
state of consciousness is a predisposition to the consciousness
of content which corresponds with temporo-spatial nestedness
or neural activity. This, of course, is directly relevant to the
current discussion and relies upon a large body of evidence
reviewed, in part, above. According to the TTC, nestedness
in space and time is critical to the state of being conscious.
It represents a readiness for stimuli to become consciously
perceived (Northoff and Huang, 2017). The authors relate
temporo-spatial nestedness to the ‘‘dynamic repertoire’’, which
refers to the temporal and spatial range of neural reactions
that occurs in conscious states but is substantially reduced
in non-conscious states (Hudetz et al., 2015). The contents
of consciousness (dimension 2) are related to temporo-spatial
nestedness in terms of alignment between stimulus time and
strength with the underlying oscillations. It is referred to as
the neural prerequisite of consciousness (Northoff and Huang,
2017). Slow-wave activities are hypothesized to provide a
temporal window in which the network is receptive to the
integration of stimulus-induced activity (Hasson et al., 2008).
With respect to phenomenology or experience, TTC connects
this to the spatial and temporal expansion of stimulus-induced
activities (Northoff and Huang, 2017). The stimulus-driven
activity becomes integrated across the brain but is differentiated
in terms of its spatial and temporal configuration (Northoff and
Huang, 2017). Dimension 4 of the TTC deals with cognitive
processing and report and thus reflects delayed stimulus-driven
effects (Northoff and Huang, 2017).
COMPETING THEORIES OFFER
DIFFERENT EXPLANATIONS FOR
PHENOMENAL FEATURES OF HUMAN
CONSCIOUSNESS
What Uniﬁes Consciousness?
Since human consciousness is composed of contents of various
types which manifest as a unity, it is necessary for a theory of
consciousness to explain how this is accomplished in the brain.
Figure 2 shows three different models which broadly represent
the different theoretical ways of handling unity. According to IIT,
unity occurs by means of network integration in the maximal
cause-effect structure over a precise spatial and temporal frame
(Tononi et al., 2016). This is a kind of causal integration, assumed
FIGURE 2 | Models of Consciousness. The thalamocortical substrate of
consciousness, proposed by different theories can be generally mapped onto
these models. TIC is represented as the darkness of the color gray. (A) In this
model, the substrate of consciousness is a single, highly integrated network
in the thalamocortical system. Over time, its spatial character and position in
the brain changes (different shapes at different positions in the three panels).
(B) In this model, the substrate of consciousness is a single, large, and
integrated or resonant network in the thalamocortical system. Its elemental
make-up changes over time (gray shape over three panels). (C) In this third
model, the substrate of consciousness consists of a large, integrated network
in the thalamocortical system (light gray), which can undergo some elemental
change across time (shape across panels). Nested within this network are
smaller networks with higher TIC (darker colors).
to occur among neuronal elements by means of mutual influence.
In that sense, it is very similar to the assumptions of the TICL,
which unifies the contents of consciousness within a common
structure of causality, in a nested way. The unity for IIT, however,
is proposed to be quite limited in spatial and temporal breadth, as
in Figure 2A. Like in Figure 1, the degree of integrated causality,
information exchange, or functional synchrony is represented
by the darkness of the gray color. In Figure 1A, we see a
single, highly integrated structure (dark gray), as proposed to
be the physical substrate of consciousness in IIT. According
to GNW, The global workspace unifies the content by making
information widely available (Dehaene and Naccache, 2001).
This idea is mechanistically distinct but still seems to allow that
the communication of information across a common, integrated
structure is key to unifying the content. The spatial location
in the brain where this takes place is understood in GNW
to include prefrontal cortical structures, and the timing with
respect to stimulus-onset to conscious perception is late relative
to IIT. In a previous article, I criticized GNW as potentially
situating the conscious ‘‘global workspace’’ separately in space
from the cortical networks responsible for the content (Winters,
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
2020). This interpretation would have GNW being represented
by Figure 2A, like IIT. The difference would be that, for GNW,
the substrate of consciousness would be situated further toward
the front of the cortex. While that interpretation of the ‘‘global
workspace’’ might be incompatible with the TICL, reconciliation
could be had by understanding that the ‘‘global workspace’’
consists of the posterior cortical networks producing content
as well as the frontal cortical workspace neurons, as long as
they are in sufficient communication. In the latter case, GNW
might look more like Figure 2C, wherein content-producing
networks would be nested within the ‘‘global workspace’’. For
GRT, spatially widespread synchronization by means of EM
fields, unifies consciousness. Those neuronal constituents which
are part of the ‘‘dominant consciousness’’ make up its unified
content (Hunt and Schooler, 2019). This might be best illustrated
by Figure 2B, wherein the spatial domain of the ‘‘dominant
consciousness’’ is larger than IIT’s maximum of cause-effect
power. In O-A, phenomenal space-time is a subjective ‘‘virtual
world’’ in which nested, local EM field activity self-presents
(Fingelkurts et al., 2010). This is best represented by Figure 2C.
The latter is more consistent with the TICL, in that the neuronal
ensembles responsible for content are nested in space and
time within a common EM field. The difference is one of
explicit terminology regarding consciousness in the brain as
an integrated structure of electromagnetism vs. an integrated
structure of causality. Reconciliation between theories is possible,
once we recognize that EM forces are necessarily the mechanism
of causality instantiated in the brain, in the TICL, or any
other neuroscientific theory. According to TTC, spatial-temporal
nestedness of integrated activity occurring upon the brain’s
spontaneous activity, as in cross-frequency coupling, unites the
contents of consciousness (Northoff and Huang, 2017). Again,
this model is consistent with Figure 2C. This proposal satisfies
the claims of the TICL framework but explores the spatial and
temporal mechanisms of integration much more specifically.
Figure 2C is an appropriate model for how the TICL accounts for
the unity of conscious contents. In Figures 2A,B, the structure
of consciousness is one thing altogether. By contrast, Figure 2C
allows for the spatial and temporal nesting of content-producing
neural structures within a hierarchical arrangement. Notably, the
dark gray shape appearing in Figure 2A is contained within
the larger, light gray shape in Figure 2C. This reflects that, in
the TICL, the maximum cause-effect structure is a Subsystem
contained within a larger System (Winters, 2020).
What Speciﬁes the Content?
The contents of consciousness are specific and qualitatively
distinguishable. They tend to arise in correlation with localized
cortical functions in a hierarchical arrangement. According to
IIT, the specificity of content is given by the constituent elements
of the substrate of consciousness and their causal power.
The contents are built into the maximal cause-effect structure
(Tononi et al., 2016). Thus, Figure 2A shows a single structure
in the brain corresponding to a high level of integrated causality.
The precise structure of cause and effect which currently
composes the maximum, is unique and different from any other
configuration, allowing for unimaginable variety (Tononi et al.,
2016). According to the GNW, specific contents occur due to
the sustained activity of a fraction of thalamocortical neurons
which are broadcast to, or ‘‘accessed’’ by the ‘‘global workspace’’
(Dehaene and Naccache, 2001; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011).
Put side-by-side, this is not so different from IIT, in principle.
Which neurons are integrated or in communication, determines
the qualitative character of consciousness, in both models. The
TICL is roughly compatible with this. In the TICL, a Subsystem is
a subset of neuronal elements within the spatially and temporally
wider integrated System, which is even more causally-integrated
over a shorter timeframe than the whole System (Winters,
2020). The specificity of content is given by the composition of
Subsystems which exist at a given moment, and how they are
changing. In Figure 2C, the darker shapes within the lighter gray
shape, correspond, in simplified form, to a set of Subsystems.
For GRT, the contents are specified by the particular constituent
neurons in the resonant structure (Hunt and Schooler, 2019).
Thus, in Figure 2B, there are no separate shapes distinguished
within the single, common neural substrate of consciousness. In
O-A, local extracellular EM fields are highly structured in space-
time. This structure determines the content of PST (Fingelkurts
et al., 2010). The combinatorial power within and among
operational modules enables near infinitely diverse qualitative
contents (Benedetti et al., 2010). The operational modules are
similar to the concept of Subsystems, and they appear something
like the image in Figure 2C. According to TTC, the stimulus-
induced high-frequency activity becomes expanded, similar to
‘‘conscious access’’ in GNW. This integrates the nested activity
within the context of the brain’s spontaneous activity (Massimini
et al., 2005; Northoff and Huang, 2017). The specificity comes
from its spatial-temporal configuration within the integrated
brain (Northoff and Huang, 2017). This is well illustrated in
Figure 2C. Each in its own terms, these frameworks come to
fairly similar conclusions about specificity. In the thalamocortical
system, a large variety of functional configurations are possible at
any given time. One way or another, this enables a wide range of
contents.
What Is the Point of View?
According to IIT, consciousness is intrinsic to itself. It is identical
to the collected content and the point of view upon it (Tononi
et al., 2016). A conceptual difficulty for this viewpoint is that
consciousness cannot be continuous if its substrate is not the
same thing from instance to instance (Figure 2A across time).
In fact, it seems to me that a conscious being would be a
brief moment of existence, with an endless stream of new
conscious beings existing one after another. This is at odds with
phenomenology. In GRT, ‘‘Dominant consciousness’’ must be
intrinsic to itself, as well. If Figure 2B is a fair representation
of the spatial domain of the resonant structure, it must provide
its own intrinsic point of view. Like in IIT, the structure of
consciousness must be understood to exist to itself. By contrast,
for GNW, the ‘‘global workspace’’ must provide the point of
view upon the content to which it has access. This is more like
the TICL, in which the System has a point of view upon the
character and dynamics of its subsystems (Winters, 2020). The
point of view is understood to be the thing which contains the
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
content. This insight reverses the normal perspective of feeling
as if we look out upon the world since the phenomenal world
occurs within consciousness. The caveat for GNW is the one
which I mentioned above; the ‘‘global workspace’’ which achieves
the nesting of contents within consciousness must include the
cortical regions which produce the content. If it does this,
then the ‘‘global workspace’’ can provide the point of view
upon the contents which occur with the sustained, but limited,
thalamocortical activity which is being accessed in consciousness.
Thus, GNW might look something like Figure 2A except that the
structure of consciousness would have a more stable anatomical
shape and would be situated more frontally. Alternatively, as
suggested above, GNW might be interpreted closer to what is
seen in Figure 2C, in which the point of view is that larger,
lighter gray structure containing the smaller, darker ones. In
O-A, PST is a highly abstract self-presentation of operational
spatial-temporal patterns (Fingelkurts et al., 2010). It follows that
the PST is the point of view upon those operational patterns. As
long as that is the understanding, then the framing provided in
the TICL is perfectly amenable to O-A, with the larger, lighter
shape providing the point of view upon its contents (Figure 2C).
While not stated explicitly in the TTC literature, it might be
that the point of view is the widest spatial-temporal integrated
structure, as in the TICL. For TTC, the brain’s intrinsic space and
time are given by the spatial extension and temporal duration
of neural activities (Northoff and Huang, 2017). If the authors’
viewpoint is consistent with the TICL, then the wider extension
in space and time corresponds to the System of TICL and
the theories are compatible (Winters, 2020). For the TICL, the
System (lighter gray) contains specific Subsystems (darker gray
shapes), the activities of which it experiences from its own, larger
point of view.
How Is Conscious Continuity Understood?
According to IIT, consciousness is a sequence of discrete
instances, each replacing the former, not continuous (Tononi
et al., 2016). This has been criticized as a difficulty for IIT
because the theory begins with a set of self-evident axioms
without acknowledging temporal continuity (Wittmann, 2011;
Winters, 2020; Kent and Wittmann, 2021). We see that in
Figure 2A, across the three points in time, the physical
substrate of consciousness has changed substantially. For IIT,
this is not a gradual morphing, but a sequence of structures
gaining ascendency. By contrast, GNW supports this feature of
phenomenal consciousness. According to GNW, the sustained
activity of thalamocortical neurons should allow a period of
continuity for cognitive utilization, even for seconds after the
disappearance of the immediate stimulus activity (Dehaene and
Naccache, 2001; Baars, 2005). The information which is globally
available should be updated as a continuous stream (Dehaene
and Changeux, 2005). The integration of experience, for GNW,
occurs both at a point in time and across time (Mashour et al.,
2020). In GRT, the borders of the ‘‘dominant consciousness’’
are continually changing as activities come into resonance with
them, by undergoing phase transition (Hunt and Schooler, 2019).
However, the dynamics of conscious content must be encoded
spatially because there is no difference in temporal character;
they are synchronous (McFadden, 2020). This is what we see
in Figure 2B over the three time points. In O-A, dynamic
content exhibits intermittence because of the suggested rapid
transitional process and subsequent restructuring (Fingelkurts
et al., 2013). But, phenomenal space time consists of spatially
and temporally nested content (Fingelkurts et al., 2010). This
implies that O-A is capable of supporting both temporal
continuity of the conscious state as well as dynamic contents
within conscious experience. This is illustrated in Figure 2C,
in which the networks responsible for content are changing
across time. According to TTC, temporal receptive windows
are arranged hierarchically (Northoff and Huang, 2017). This
theory also exhibits temporal continuity with overlapping and
nested contents in time. In Figure 2C across the time points,
we see changes in the nested content-producing networks as
well as spatial overlap. Thus, IIT stands alone among these
theories in insisting upon a discrete timeframe for the entire
conscious experience. The TICL, as well as O-A and TTC
in particular, proposes continuous consciousness with nested
contents in space and time. For the TICL, Figure 2C shows
that the System is continuous across time, even as it may
undergo some spatial change as elements enter and exit the
integrated structure. Meanwhile, Subsystems can arise, change,
and disappear. Notice that the Subsystems are always shown in
darker gray to reflect that they must have a higher level of TIC
than the System in which they are embedded. Also, notice that
the most highly integrated Subsystem (darkest gray object) is that
which appears in Figure 2A. The structure which IIT purports to
be the whole substrate of consciousness should correspond to a
high-TIC Subsystem for TICL, contained within the lower-TIC,
but spatially and temporally larger, System.
How Is Consciousness Limited?
In IIT, contents are only possible where their underlying
elemental activities are within the spatio-temporal borders of the
maximally irreducible cause-effect structure (Tononi et al., 2016).
This means that most neurons in the integrated thalamocortical
system are not producing content at a given time. Thus, in
Figure 2A, most of the brain is shown in white. Similarly,
in GRT, the borders of the ‘‘dominant consciousness’’ are
limited in accordance with the neurons which are resonant
or synchronized (Hunt and Schooler, 2019). This is roughly
what is shown in Figure 2B, with much of the thalamocortical
system in ‘‘dominant consciousness’’. In GNW, long-range
synchronization facilitates ‘‘conscious access’’ by the ‘‘global
workspace’’ (Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). Only a limited
fraction of thalamocortical neurons are ‘‘ignited’’ and sustained,
providing internal coherence, while the rest are inhibited
(Dehaene et al., 2003; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). According
to O-A, local extracellular EM fields are perceivable as nested
within the wider EM field (Fingelkurts et al., 2019). Presumably,
a threshold is determined by the strength of local extracellular
EM fields, such that too weak a field is unperceivable. TTC
proposes a mechanism of alignment between stimulus time
with phase preference to the underlying spontaneous activity
and a threshold driven by resulting neural amplitude (Northoff
and Huang, 2017). For the TICL, the presence or absence of
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
a Subsystem depends upon the subset of neuronal elements
which would make it up having a higher degree of TIC than
the larger System does (Winters, 2020). The content is limited
to the Subsystems which exist at a given time. Any subset of
neurons which is exhibiting causality in the integrated System,
but not to a greater degree than the System, is buried in the noise,
unmeaningful, and not experienced (Figure 2C in light gray).
CONCLUSIONS
The TICL makes claims that distinguish it in the field of
theoretical frameworks. The TICL builds its foundation upon
five phenomenal aspects of human consciousness, with the
assumption that the most parsimonious explanation for these
phenomenal aspects will be an arrangement of physical structure
and interactions (anatomy and physiology) which mirror them.
Descartes wrote, ‘‘. . .this truth, I think hence I am, was so
certain and of such evidence, that no ground of doubt, however
extravagant, could be alleged by the skeptics capable of shaking
it, I concluded that I might, without scruple accept it as the
first principle of the philosophy of which I was in search.’’
(Descartes, 1912). Thus, he observed content and inferred that
he must exist. He asked himself what he is and concluded that
he is a ‘‘thinking thing’’, a thing with thoughts (and perceptions).
Whatever conscious being is, it is a point of view upon contents.
With this undeniable fact in mind, we can make observations
about the contents of consciousness, from which we note that
they are specific, limited, and meaningful, and that they are
continually changing. They are specific and meaningful in that
we can distinguish among them (sound vs. image, left vs. right,
blue vs. red). They are limited in that we do not experience all
of the potential contents all the time. And, they are dynamic.
The point of view persists as the contents change. This results
in a model in which the unified mind (and therefore integrated
brain function; a System) contains phenomenal contents within
it (differentiated Subsystems). Descartes’ dualism made the
assumption that the contents were real things (physical stuff)
and that consciousness was a separate real thing (mental stuff).
A physical, scientific account of phenomenal consciousness must
reject this separation. By nesting the content-specific NCC within
the full NCC, we arrive at a common structure of which the
point of view must be that of the full NCC upon the content-
specific NCC (Figure 1). The neural correlate of the point of
view which contains the content-specific NCC must be not only
spatially larger but also temporally longer. By this means, the
point of view can bear witness to changing content. According
to the TICL, consciousness is a complex structure of integrated
causality in time. Causality necessitates force, and EM (Lorentz
force) is almost certainly the force at play. The distinctions I
wish to highlight among the theories discussed here are not
drawn between those which are explicitly network-based (IIT,
GNW, TCC) and those which are explicitly EM field-based
(GRT and O-A). Rather, the critical distinction is between
those theories in which the content-specific NCC are nested
within the full NCC and those which conflate the two. In my
general analysis, the TICL, O-A, and the TTC best exemplify this
distinction. Critically, these explicit mechanisms for the neural
correlates of consciousness ultimately collapse into a common
implicit mechanism: some arrangement of EM interactions.
Recognizing this will enable theoretical neuroscience to escape
the bounds of biological and psychological thinking and place
our deepest problem (the problem of consciousness) firmly
within the purview of physics, where an explanation, after all, will
be elucidated.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included in
the article, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding
author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work and
has approved it for publication.
REFERENCES
Aru, J., Aru, J., Priesemann, V., Wibral, M., Lana, L., Pipa, G., et al. (2015).
Untangling cross-frequency coupling in neuroscience. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
31, 51–61. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2014.08.002
Axmacher, N., Henseler, M. M., Jensen, O., Weinreich, I., Elger, C. E., and
Fell, J. (2010). Cross-frequency coupling supports multi-item working memory
in the human hippocampus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 107, 3228–3233.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0911531107
Baars, B. J. (2005). Global workspace theory of consciousness: toward a
cognitive neuroscience of human experience. Prog. Brain Res. 150, 45–53.
doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(05)50004-9
Bassett, D. S., and Sporns, O. (2017). Network neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci. 20,
353–364. doi: 10.1038/nn.4502
Benedetti, G., Marchetti, G., Fingelkurts, A. A., and Fingelkurts, A. A.
(2010). Mind operational semantics and brain operational architectonics:
a putative correspondence. Open Neuroimag. J. 4, 53–69. doi: 10.2174/
1874440001004020053
Blake, R., and Logothetis, N. K. (2002). Visual competition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3,
13–21. doi: 10.1038/nrn701
Blanke, O., and Metzinger, T. (2009). Full-body illusions and minimal phenomenal
selfhood. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13, 7–13. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2008.10.003
Blumenfeld, H. (2011). Epilepsy and the consciousness system: transient vegetative
state? Neurol. Clin. 29, 801–823. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2011.07.014
Boly, M., Balteau, E., Schnakers, C., Degueldre, C., Moonen, G., Luxen, A., et al.
(2007). Baseline brain activity fluctuations predict somatosensory perceptions
in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 104, 12187–12192. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0611404104
Boly, M., Moran, R., Murphy, M., Boveroux, P., Bruno, M.-A., Noirhomme, Q.,
et al. (2012). Connectivity changes underlying spectral EEG changes
during propofol-induced loss of consciousness. J. Neurosci. 32, 7082–7090.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3769-11.2012
Bragin, A., Jandó, G., Nádasdy, Z., Hetke, J., Wise, K., and Buzsáki, G. (1995).
Gamma (40–100 Hz) oscillation in the hippocampus of the behaving rat.
J. Neurosci. 15, 47–60. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.15-01-00047.1995
Breitmeyer, B. G., and Ogmen, H. (2000). Recent models and findings in visual
backward masking: a comparison, review, and update. Percept. Psychophys. 62,
1572–1595. doi: 10.3758/bf03212157
Buzsáki, G., and Draguhn, A. (2004). Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks.
Science 304, 1926–1929. doi: 10.1126/science.1099745
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
Canolty, R. T., and Knight, R. T. (2010). The functional role of cross-frequency
coupling. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 506–515. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.09.001
Canolty, R. T., Edwards, E., Dalal, S. S., Soltani, M., Nagarajan, S. S., Kirsch, H. E.,
et al. (2006). High gamma power is phase-locked to theta oscillations in human
neocortex. Science 313, 1626–1628. doi: 10.1126/science.1128115
Crick, F., and Koch, C. (1998). Feature article consciousness and neuroscience.
Cereb. Cortex 8, 97–107. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2019.03.031
Dehaene, S., and Changeux, J. P. (2005). Ongoing spontaneous activity controls
access to consciousness: a neuronal model for inattentional blindness. PLoS
Biol. 3:e141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0030141
Dehaene, S., and Changeux, J.-P. (2011). Experimental and theoretical approaches
to conscious processing. Neuron 70, 200–227. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.03.
018
Dehaene, S., Charles, L., King, J. R., and Marti, S. (2014). Toward a computational
theory of conscious processing. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 25, 76–84. doi: 10.1016/j.
conb.2013.12.005
Dehaene, S., and Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive neuroscience of
consciousness: basic evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition 79, 1–37.
doi: 10.1016/s0010-0277(00)00123-2
Dehaene, S., Sergent, C., and Changeux, J.-P. (2003). A neuronal network model
linking subjective reports and objective physiological data during conscious
perception. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 100, 8520–8525. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1332574100
Descartes, R. (1912). A Discourse on Method: Meditations and Principles (First
publ). London: Everyman’s Library.
Doerig, A., Schurger, A., Hess, K., and Herzog, M. H. (2019). The unfolding
argument: why IIT and other causal structure theories cannot explain
consciousness. Conscious. Cogn. 72, 49–59. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2019.04.002
Fingelkurts, A. A., Fingelkurts, A. A., and Kallio-Tamminen, T. (2020). Selfhood
triumvirate: from phenomenology to brain activity and back again. Conscious.
Cogn. 86:103031. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2020.103031
Fingelkurts, A. A., Fingelkurts, A. A., and Neves, C. F. H. (2010). Natural world
physical, brain operational and mind phenomenal space-time. Phys. Life Rev. 7,
195–249. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2010.04.001
Fingelkurts, A. A., Fingelkurts, A. A., and Neves, C. F. H. (2013). Consciousness
as a phenomenon in the operational architectonics of brain organization:
criticality and self-organization considerations. Chaos Solitons Fractals 55,
13–31. doi: 10.1016/j.chaos.2013.02.007
Fingelkurts, A. A., Fingelkurts, A. A., Neves, C. F. H., and Kallio-Tamminen, T.
(2019). Brain-mind operational architectonics: at the boundary between
quantum physics and Eastern metaphysics. Phys. Life Rev. 31, 122–133.
doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2018.11.001
Frässle, S., Sommer, J., Jansen, A., Naber, M., and Einhäuser, W. (2014). Binocular
rivalry: frontal activity relates to introspection and action but not to perception.
J. Neurosci. 34, 1738–1747. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4403-13.2014
Freeman, W. J. (2005). A field-theoretic approach to understanding scale-free
neocortical dynamics. Biol. Cybern. 92, 350–359. doi: 10.1007/s00422-005-
0563-1
Fries, P. (2015). Communication through coherence (CTC 2.0). Neuron 88,
220–235. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.09.034
Gaillard, R., Dehaene, S., Adam, C., Clemenceau, S., Hasboun, D., Baulac, M.,
et al. (2009). Converging intracranial markers of conscious access. PLoS Biol.
7, 472–492. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000061
Gross, J., Schmitz, F., Schnitzler, I., Kessler, K., Shapiro, K., Hommel, B.,
et al. (2004). Modulation of long-range neural synchrony reflects temporal
limitations of visual attention in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 101,
13050–13055. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0404944101
Hagmann, P., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Meuli, R., Honey, C. J., Van Wedeen, J.,
et al. (2008). Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biol.
6, 1479–1493. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060159
Hasson, U., Yang, E., Vallines, I., Heeger, D. J., and Rubin, N. (2008). A hierarchy
of temporal receptive windows in human cortex. J. Neurosci. 28, 2539–2550.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5487-07.2008
He, S., and MacLeod, D. I. A. (2001). Orientation-selective adaptation and
tilt after-effect from invisible patterns. Nature 411, 473–476. doi: 10.1038/
35078072
He, B. J., Zempel, J. M., Snyder, A. Z., and Raichle, M. E. (2010). The temporal
structures and functional significance of scale-free brain activity. Neuron 66,
353–369. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.04.020
Hermes, D., Miller, K. J., Wandell, B. A., and Winawer, J. (2015). Stimulus
dependence of gamma oscillations in human visual cortex. Cereb. Cortex 25,
2951–2959. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu091
Hesselmann, G., Kell, C. A., and Kleinschmidt, A. (2008). Ongoing activity
fluctuations in hMT+ bias the perception of coherent visual motion. J. Neurosci.
28, 14481–14485. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4398-08.2008
Honey, C. J., Sporns, O., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Thiran, J. P., Meuli, R., et al.
(2009). Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural
connectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 106, 2035–2040. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0811168106
Hudetz, A. G. (2012). General anesthesia and human brain connectivity. Brain
Connect. 2, 291–302. doi: 10.1089/brain.2012.0107
Hudetz, A. G., Liu, X., and Pillay, S. (2015). Dynamic repertoire of intrinsic
brain states is reduced in propofol-induced unconsciousness. Brain Connect.
5, 10–22. doi: 10.1089/brain.2014.0230
Hunt, T., and Schooler, J. W. (2019). The easy part of the hard problem:
a resonance theory of consciousness. Front.
Hum.
Neurosci. 13:378.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00378
Imamoglu, F., Kahnt, T., Koch, C., and Haynes, J.-D. (2012). Changes in functional
connectivity support conscious object recognition. NeuroImage 63, 1909–1917.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.07.056
Jiang, Y., Zhou, K., and He, S. (2007). Human visual cortex responds
to invisible chromatic flicker. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 657–662. doi: 10.1038/
nn1879
Kent, L., and Wittmann, M. (2021). Special Issue: consciousness science and its
theories Time consciousness: the missing link in theories of consciousness.
Neurosci. Conscious. 2021:niab011. doi: 10.1093/nc/niab011
Kent, L., Van Doorn, G., and Klein, B. (2019). Systema temporis: a time-based
dimensional framework for consciousness and cognition. Conscious. Cogn.
73:102766.doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2019.102766
King, J.-R., Sitt, J. D., Faugeras, F., Rohaut, B., El Karoui, I., Cohen, L., et al. (2013).
Information sharing in the brain indexes consciousness in noncommunicative
patients. Curr. Biol. 23, 1914–1919. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.07.075
Koch, C. (2004). The Quest for Consciousness: A Neurobiological Approach.
Englewood: Roberts and Company Publishers.
Koch, C., Massimini, M., Boly, M., and Tononi, G. (2016). Neural correlates
of consciousness: progress and problems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 307–321.
doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.22
Lamme, V., and Roelfsema, P. (2000). The distinct modes of vision offered
by feedforward and recurrent processing. Trends Neurosci. 23, 571–579.
doi: 10.1016/s0166-2236(00)01657-x
Leopold, D. A., Murayama, Y., and Logothetis, N. K. (2003). Very slow activity
fluctuations in monkey visual cortex: implications for functional brain imaging.
Cereb. Cortex 13, 422–433. doi: 10.1093/cercor/13.4.422
Lisman, J. E., and Jensen, O. (2013). The θ-γ neural code. Neuron 77, 1002–1006.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.03.007
Marinazzo, D., Gosseries, O., Boly, M., Ledoux, D., Rosanova, M., Massimini, M.,
et al. (2014). Directed information transfer in scalp electroencephalographic
recordings: insights on disorders of consciousness. Clin. EEG Neurosci. 45,
33–39. doi: 10.1177/1550059413510703
Mashour, G. A., and Hudetz, A. G. (2018). Neural correlates of unconsciousness
in large-scale brain networks. Trends Neurosci. 41, 150–160. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.
2018.01.003
Mashour, G. A., Roelfsema, P., Changeux, J. P., and Dehaene, S. (2020).
Conscious processing and the global neuronal workspace hypothesis. Neuron
105, 776–798. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.01.026
Massimini, M., Ferrarelli, F., Huber, R., and Esser, S. K. (2005). Breakdown of
cortical effective connectivity during sleep—supporting material. Science 309,
2228–2233. doi: 10.1126/science.1117256
Mathewson, K. E., Gratton, G., Fabiani, M., Beck, D. M., and Ro, T. (2009). To
see or not to see: prestimulus α phase predicts visual awareness. J. Neurosci. 29,
2725–2732. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3963-08.2009
McFadden, J. (2020). Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the
cemi field theory of consciousness. Neurosci. Conscious. 2020:niaa016.
doi: 10.1093/nc/niaa016
Melloni, L., Molina, C., Pena, M., Torres, D., Singer, W., and Rodriguez, E.
(2007). Synchronization of neural activity across cortical areas correlates with
conscious perception. J. Neurosci. 27, 2858–2865. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
4623-06.2007
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459

Winters
TICL and Theories of Consciousness
Millière, R., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Roseman, L., Trautwein, F. M., and Berkovich-
Ohana, A. (2018). Psychedelics, meditation, and self-consciousness. Front.
Psychol. 9:1475. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01475
Milstein, J., Mormann, F., Fried, I., and Koch, C. (2009). Neuronal shot noise
and brownian 1/f2 behavior in the local field potential. PLoS One 4:e4338.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004338
Monti, M. M., Lutkenhoff, E. S., Rubinov, M., Boveroux, P., Vanhaudenhuyse, A.,
Gosseries, O., et al. (2013). Dynamic change of global and local information
processing in propofol-induced loss and recovery of consciousness. PLoS
Comput. Biol. 9:e1003271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003271
Murray, J. D., Bernacchia, A., Freedman, D. J., Romo, R., Wallis, J. D., Cai, X.,
et al. (2014). A hierarchy of intrinsic timescales across primate cortex HHS
Public Access Author manuscript. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 1661–1663. doi: 10.1038/
nn.3862
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? Philos. Rev. 83, 435–450.
doi: 10.2307/2183914
Nir, Y., Mukamel, R., Dinstein, I., Privman, E., Harel, M., Fisch, L.,
et al. (2008). Interhemispheric correlations of slow spontaneous neuronal
fluctuations revealed in human sensory cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 1100–1108.
doi: 10.1038/nn.2177
Northoff, G., and Huang, Z. (2017). How do the brain’s time and space
mediate consciousness and its different dimensions? Temporo-spatial theory
of consciousness (TTC). Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 80, 630–645. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2017.07.013
Northoff, G., and Lamme, V. (2020). Neural signs and mechanisms of
consciousness: is there a potential convergence of theories of consciousness in
sight? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 118, 568–587. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.07.
019
Northoff, G., Wainio-Theberge, S., and Evers, K. (2020). Is temporo-spatial
dynamics the ‘‘common currency’’ of brain and mind? In Quest of
‘‘Spatiotemporal Neuroscience’’. Phys. Life Rev. 33, 34–54. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.
2019.05.002
Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., and Tononi, G. (2014). From the phenomenology
to the mechanisms of consciousness: integrated information theory 3.0. PLoS
Comput. Biol. 10:e1003588. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003588
Parvizi, J., and Damasio, A. (2001). Consciousness and the brainstem. Cognition
79, 135–160. doi: 10.1016/s0010-0277(00)00127-x
Pitts, M. A., Padwal, J., Fennelly, D., Martinez, A., and Hillyard, S. A. (2014).
Gamma band activity and the P3 reflect post-perceptual processes, not
visual awareness. NeuroImage 101, 337–350. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.
07.024
Ploner, M., Lee, M. C., Wiech, K., Bingel, U., and Tracey, I. (2010). Prestimulus
functional connectivity determines pain perception in humans. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U S A 107, 355–360. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0906186106
Poppel, E. (1997). A hierarchical model of temporal perception. Trends Cogn. Sci.
1, 56–61. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(97)01008-5
Power, J. D., Cohen, A. L., Nelson, S. M., Wig, G. S., Barnes, K. A., Church, J. A.,
et al. (2011). Functional network organization of the human brain. Neuron 72,
665–678. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.006
Qin, P., Grimm, S., Duncan, N. W., Fan, Y., Huang, Z., Lane, T., et al.
(2016). Spontaneous activity in default-mode network predicts ascription
of self-relatedness to stimuli. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 11, 693–702.
doi: 10.1093/scan/nsw008
Ray, S., and Maunsell, J. H. R. (2010). Differences in gamma frequencies across
visual cortex restrict their possible use in computation. Neuron 67, 885–896.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.08.004
Sadaghiani, S., Hesselmann, G., Friston, K. J., and Kleinschmidt, A. (2010). The
relation of ongoing brain activity, evoked neural responses and cognition.
Front. Syst. Neurosci. 4:20. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2010.00020
Sarasso, S., Boly, M., Napolitani, M., Gosseries, O., Charland-Verville, V.,
Casarotto,
S.,
et
al.
(2015).
Consciousness
and
complexity
during
unresponsiveness induced by propofol, xenon, and ketamine. Curr. Biol.
25, 3099–3105. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.10.014
Searle, J. R. (1997). The Mystery of Consciousness. 1st Edn. New York, NY: The
New York Review of Boos.
Seth, A. K., Baars, B. J., and Edelman, D. B. (2005). Criteria for consciousness
in humans and other mammals. Conscious. Cogn. 14, 119–139. doi: 10.1016/j.
concog.2004.08.006
Shmuel, A., and Leopold, D. A. (2008). Neuronal correlates of spontaneous
fluctuations
in
fMRI
signals
in
monkey
visual
cortex:
implications
for functional connectivity at rest. Hum. Brain Mapp. 29, 751–761.
doi: 10.1002/hbm.20580
Siclari, F., Baird, B., Perogamvros, L., Bernardi, G., LaRocque, J. J., Riedner, B.,
et al. (2017). The neural correlates of dreaming. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 872–878.
doi: 10.1038/nn.4545
Sporns, O., and Betzel, R. F. (2016). Modular brain networks. Annu. Rev. Psychol.
67, 613–640. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-122414-033634
Steinke, G. K., and Galan, R. F. (2011). Brain rhythms reveal a hierarchical
network organization. PLoS Comput. Biol. 7:e1002207. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1002207
Steriade, M., Gloor, P., Llinás, R. R., Lopes da Silva, F. H., and Mesulam, M.-M.
(1990). Basic mechanisms of cerebral rhythmic activities. Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 76, 481–508. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(90)90001-z
Supèr, H., Lamme, V. A. F., and Spekreijse, H. (2001). Two distinct modes
of sensory processing oberved in monkey primary visual cortex (V1). Nat.
Neurosci. 4, 304–310. doi: 10.1038/85170
Tagliazucchi, E., and Laufs, H. (2014). Decoding wakefulness levels from typical
fMRI resting-state data reveals reliable drifts between wakefulness and sleep.
Neuron 82, 695–708. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.03.020
Thivierge, J. P., and Cisek, P. (2008). Nonperiodic synchronization in
heterogeneous networks of spiking neurons. J. Neurosci. 28, 7968–7978.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0870-08.2008
Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., and Koch, C. (2016). Integrated information
theory: from consciousness to its physical substrate. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17,
450–461. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.44
Tononi, G., and Edelman, G. M. (1998). Consciousness and complexity. Science
282, 1846–1851. doi: 10.1126/science.282.5395.1846
Tononi, G., and Koch, C. (2015). Consciousnesse here, there and everywhere.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 370:20140167. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2014.
0167
Tort, A. B. L., Komorowski, R. W., Manns, J. R., Kopell, N. J., and Eichenbaum, H.
(2009). Theta-gamma coupling increases during the learning of item-context
associations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 106, 20942–20947. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0911331106
Tsuchiya, N., and Koch, C. (2005). Continuous flash suppression reduces negative
afterimages. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1096–1101. doi: 10.1038/nn1500
Tsuchiya, N., Wilke, M., Frässle, S., and Lamme, V. A. F. (2015). No-report
paradigms: extracting the true neural correlates of consciousness. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 19, 757–770. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2015.10.002
Van Dijk, H., Schoffelen, J.-M., Oostenveld, R., and Jensen, O. (2008). Prestimulus
oscillatory activity in the alpha band predicts visual discrimination ability.
J. Neurosci. 28, 1816–1823. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1853-07.2008
Weiskrantz, L. (1996). Blindsight revisited. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 6, 215–220.
doi: 10.1016/s0959-4388(96)80075-4
Winters, J. J. (2020). The temporally-integrated causality landscape: a theoretical
framework for consciousness and meaning. Conscious. Cogn. 83:102976.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2020.102976
Wittmann, M. (2011). Moments in time. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 5:66. doi: 10.3389/
fnint.2011.00066
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2021 Winters. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
November 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 768459
