Deep learning models reveal 
the link between dynamic brain 
connectivity patterns and states of 
consciousness
Chloé Gomez1, Lynn Uhrig1,2, Vincent Frouin3, Edouard Duchesnay3, Béchir Jarraya1,4,5 & 
Antoine Grigis3,5
Decoding states of consciousness from brain activity is a central challenge in neuroscience. Dynamic 
functional connectivity (dFC) allows the study of short-term temporal changes in functional 
connectivity (FC) between distributed brain areas. By clustering dFC matrices from resting-state 
fMRI, we previously described “brain patterns” that underlie different functional configurations 
of the brain at rest. The networks associated with these patterns have been extensively analyzed. 
However, the overall dynamic organization and how it relates to consciousness remains unclear. We 
hypothesized that deep learning networks would help to model this relationship. Recent studies have 
used low-dimensional variational autoencoders (VAE) to learn meaningful representations that can 
help explaining consciousness. Here, we investigated the complexity of selecting such a generative 
model to study brain dynamics, and extended the available methods for latent space characterization 
and modeling. Therefore, our contributions are threefold. First, compared with probabilistic principal 
component analysis and sparse VAE, we showed that the selected low-dimensional VAE exhibits 
balanced performance in reconstructing dFCs and classifying brain patterns. We then explored the 
organization of the obtained low-dimensional dFC latent representations. We showed how these 
representations stratify the dynamic organization of the brain patterns as well as the experimental 
conditions. Finally, we proposed to delve into the proposed brain computational model. We first 
applied a receptive field analysis to identify preferred directions in the latent space to move from 
one brain pattern to another. Then, an ablation study was achieved where we virtually inactivated 
specific brain areas. We demonstrated the model’s efficiency in summarizing consciousness-specific 
information encoded in key inter-areal connections, as described in the global neuronal workspace 
theory of consciousness. The proposed framework advocates the possibility of developing an 
interpretable computational brain model of interest for disorders of consciousness, paving the way for 
a dynamic diagnostic support tool.
“The stream of our consciousness, […] like a bird’s life, seems to be made of an alternation of flights and 
perchings”, said the philosopher William James1. A fundamental observation that still puzzles many scientists. 
Like the seasons that transform our landscapes, the spontaneous fluctuations of the brain reveal very different 
brain configurations. Brain activity at rest is commonly characterized by the spontaneous fluctuations of regional 
brain fMRI signals. Dynamic functional connectivity (dFC), a recent expansion to traditional functional 
connectivity (FC) analysis, explores the short-term temporal changes in FC between distributed brain areas2 
and goes beyond the typical assumption that functional networks are temporally static.
DFC matrices can be clustered into several “brain patterns”. These brain patterns are typically grouped 
using unsupervised k-means clustering, where the centroid of each cluster represents a pattern2–4. Temporal 
analysis of the dFCs shows that wakefulness and anesthesia-induced loss of consciousness exhibit a reorganizing 
repertoire of brain patterns. This repertoire corresponds to an ensemble of distinct and repeatable patterns of 
brain activity3–5. The conscious brain is the site of rapidly changing dynamics within a rich repertoire of brain 
1Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, NeuroSpin center, CEA, INSERM U992, Université Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, 
France. 2Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, Necker Hospital, AP-HP, Université de Paris Cité, Paris, 
France. 3BAOBAB Unit, NeuroSpin center, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. 4Neuroscience Pole, 
Foch Hospital, Université Paris-Saclay, UVSQ, Suresnes, France. 5These authors contributed equally: Béchir Jarraya 
and Antoine Grigis. email: chloegomezpro@gmail.com; bechir.jarraya@cea.fr; antoine.grigis@cea.fr
OPEN
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
1
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports

patterns. Conversely, during anesthesia and disorders of consciousness, brain activity is expressed according to 
a more rigid and poorer repertoire of brain patterns (i.e., transitions between brain patterns are rare, and some 
brain patterns are seldom visited)3,4. In this case, the brain dynamic connectivity is reduced to the underlying 
anatomical connectivity3,4,6.
The representation and interpretation of brain patterns is still an area of ongoing research. Previous dynamic 
studies have examined the frequency of occurrences or stability of each brain pattern2,3 and have proposed 
to project fMRI data into two- or three-dimensional space7. However, they either do not take into account 
the spatiotemporal nature of the data or focus on task fMRI rather than rs-fMRI8,9. Thus, the study of low-
dimensional space is a highly promising approach to model a fine-grained representation of brain patterns. This 
would require a full characterization of the optimal size of this low-dimensional space, taking into account the 
learning capacity of the model. Previous work in the literature supports the choice of a low-dimensional model 
to study brain dynamics. For example, dFCs have been shown to reflect the interplay of a small number of latent 
processes using clustering or PCA-based reduction techniques2,10, and latent linear models can also be used to 
estimate these underlying processes11. However, linear models may be inadequate if the mapping is nonlinear 
or, equivalently, if the learned manifold is curved. To address this issue, variational autoencoders (VAEs) have 
been implemented in several studies7,12,13. The probabilistic nature of such generative models holds great 
promise for exploring the data structure. Unlike discriminative models, VAEs are unsupervised models that do 
not require a labeled dataset. In the proposed work, the choice of architecture is supported by the pioneering 
work of Perl et al.7. They showed that when a VAE (which parameterized both the encoder and decoder using 
a multi-layer perceptron (MLP)) is trained with simulated whole-brain data from awake and asleep healthy 
volunteers, the learned representations showed faded states of wakefulness. The choice of the optimal latent 
space dimension remained an open question in their work. This choice is a trade-off between compressing only 
essential information and preserving data reconstruction.
Here, we proposed a new interpretability framework, called VAE for Visualizing and Interpreting the 
ENcoded Trajectories (VAE-VIENT) between states of consciousness (Fig. 1). We took advantage of a previously 
acquired resting-state fMRI dataset in which non-human primates were scanned under different experimental 
conditions and across various states of consciousness: awake state and anesthesia-induced loss of consciousness 
using different anesthetics (propofol, sevoflurane, ketamine)3,4. After presenting the considered low-dimensional 
generative model, we showed that a 2D VAE has a balanced performance in reconstructing dFCs and classifying 
brain patterns. We then proposed a discrete and continuous characterization of the latent space. Finally, we 
showed that this model can translate some virtual modifications or inactivations of inter-areal brain connections 
into a transition of consciousness. The proposed virtual modifications or inactivations are not necessarily 
realistic but allow to illustrate the potential of the selected low-dimensional VAE.
Methods
Dataset
MRI acquisitions
This study used a rs-fMRI dataset previously acquired under different experimental conditions: awake state and 
anesthesia-induced loss of consciousness using different anesthetics (propofol, sevoflurane, ketamine)3,4. The 
data were collected for a previous project to discover a new signature of anesthesia-induced loss of consciousness. 
Here, we proposed a retrospective analysis of these data without additional experiments. In this way, we have 
maximized their use and shed new light on them.
Data were collected from five rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta), one male (monkey J) and four females 
(monkeys A, K, Ki, and R), 5–8 kg, 8–12 years old, either in the awake state or under anesthesia (deep ketamine, 
moderate/deep propofol, or moderate/deep sevoflurane anesthesia), representing six conditions. Three monkeys 
were scanned for each experimental condition (awake: monkeys A, K, and J—propofol anesthesia: monkeys K, 
R, and J—ketamine anesthesia: monkeys K, R, and Ki—sevoflurane anesthesia: monkeys Ki, R, and J). Levels 
of anesthesia were defined by a clinical arousal score and continuous EEG monitoring (for details, see Uhrig et 
al.4). 156 rs-fMRI runs (31 for the awake state, 25 for moderate propofol, 30 for deep propofol, 25 for moderate 
sevoflurane, 20 for deep sevoflurane, and 25 for deep ketamine) of 500 volumes each were acquired on a 3T 
Siemens MRI with a customized single transmit-receiver surface coil, and a repetition time of 2.4 s.
In the original study, all procedures were conducted in accordance with the European Convention for the 
Protection of Vertebrate Animals used for Experimental and Other Scientific Purposes (Directive 2010/63/
EU) and the National Institutes of Health’s Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Animal studies 
were approved by the institutional Ethical Committee (Commissariat à l’Énergie atomique et aux Énergies 
alternatives; Fontenay aux Roses, France; protocols 10-003 and 12-086). The study is reported in accordance 
with ARRIVE guidelines14.
Pre-processing
The NeuroSpin Monkey (NSM) spatial preprocessing3,4 was applied, which includes the following steps: slice 
timing correction, B0 inhomogeneities correction, motion correction, reorientation, masking, realignment, 
and smoothing. Time series denoising operations were then applied3,4. Specifically, the voxel time series were 
detrended, filtered with low-pass (0.05-Hz cutoff), high-pass (0.0025-Hz cutoff), and zero-phase fast-Fourier 
notch (0.03 Hz, to remove an artifactual pure frequency present in all the data) filters, regressed against motion 
confounds, and z-score standardized. The denoised voxel time series were further averaged over the 82 cortical 
Regions Of Interest (ROIs) of the CoCoMac atlas15 and sliced into sliding time windows of 35 TR with sliding step 
of a 1 TR3. Classically, dFCs are estimated from the correlation between functional windowed time series. Such 
an estimate captures both direct and indirect statistical dependencies. Here, the regularized precision matrix is 
considered. It captures only direct statistical dependencies by discarding the effects of mediators. Specifically, an 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
2
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

L1 penalty is applied using the Graph LASSO method. This penalty promotes sparsity but requires the choice of 
a regularization parameter λ. As described by Barttfeld and colleagues3, this parameter is set to 0.1. The resulting 
connectivity matrix of size 82 × 82 is Fisher transformed before further analysis. Repeating this procedure for 
each sliding window results in 72,384 dFCs.
Low-dimensional generative models
The Gaussian VAE
The emergence of deep learning-based generative models has spread to many disciplines, including medicine 
and neurosciences12,16–18. By learning and capturing the underlying probability distribution of the training data, 
generative models are able to generate novel samples with inherent variability. Three prominent families of 
generative models can be identified, namely generative adversarial networks, variational autoencoders (VAEs)19, 
and diffusion models. We focused on VAEs in this work. VAE training involves learning both an encoder to 
transform data as a distribution over the latent space and a decoder to reconstruct the original data (Fig. 1). 
The training minimizes the mean squared error reconstruction term, making the encoding/decoding scheme 
as effective as possible. Latent space regularity is enforced during the training to avoid overfitting and to ensure 
continuity (two nearby points in the latent space give similar content once decoded) and completeness (a code 
sample from the latent space should provide relevant content once decoded). These properties are at the core of 
the generative process. In practice, a regularization term constrains the encoding distributions to be close to a 
standard normal distribution using the Kulback-Leibler (KL) divergence.
Let’s consider a dataset D = {X(1), ..., X(n)} with n = 72, 384 dFC samples, where each sample 
X(i) = [x(i)
1 , ..., x(i)
d ] is a vector of d = 3321 dimensions (the dFC upper triangular elements). An autoencoder 
learns an identity function in an unsupervised way as follows:
Fig. 1.  Illustration of the proposed VAE-VIENT framework. A VAE learns 2D latent representations 
z = (z1i, z2i) from dynamic functional connectivity matrices (dFCs), leading to (1) evaluation of the 
proposed model against other generative models implementing different latent dimensions, (2) exploration of 
latent space with the ability to view discrete or continuous representations (here we observe how brain patterns 
are organized in latent space), and (3) two simulation paradigms, including a receptive field analysis that 
generates tensor representations to study the effect of perturbing input dFCs, and an ablation study of Global 
Neuronal Workspace (GNW) connections to study the transition from wakefulness to unconsciousness.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
3
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

	
˜
X(i) ≈fθ(gϕ(X(i)))
(1)
where gϕ(.) denotes the encoder, fθ(.) the decoder, and 
˜
X(i) is the network reconstruction of X(i). The 
reconstruction loss, expressed as a Mean Squared Error (MSE), can be written as:
	
LMSE(θ, ϕ) = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(X(i) −
˜
X(i)) = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(
X(i) −fθ(gϕ(X(i))))

(2)
In this work, the VAE relationship between the input dFC data X(i) and the latent encoding vector z(i) was 
defined with a prior pθ(z(i)) ∼N(z(i); 0, 1), the likelihood pθ(X(i)|z(i)), and the posterior pθ(z(i)|X(i)). 
Unlike (finite) Gaussian mixture models, the posterior pθ(z(i)|X(i)) is intractable. Therefore, we used a posterior 
approximation qϕ(z(i)|X(i)) which produces what is a likely code given an input X(i). In our case of Gaussian 
VAE, qϕ(z(i)|X(i)) = N(z(i); mϕ(X(i)), sϕ(X(i))), where mϕ and sϕ are expressive parameterizations of 
the conditional mean and variance of qϕ(z(i)|X(i)). The distributions returned by the encoder are further 
constrained to follow a standard normal distribution as follows:
	
LKL(θ, ϕ) = DKL(qϕ(z(i)|X(i))||pθ(z(i)))
(3)
where DKL is the KL divergence. A regularization parameter β was further introduced to learn disentangled 
representations and increase interpretability20,21. The idea is to keep the distance between the real and the 
estimated posterior distribution small while maximizing the probability of generating real data. A high β value 
emphasizes statistical independence over reconstruction. The final VAE loss was expressed as follows:
	
LV AE(θ, ϕ) = LMSE(θ, ϕ) −βLKL(θ, ϕ)
(4)
The considered generative models
We considered a VAE with a one (VAE1), two (VAE2), or three (VAE3) dimensional latent space, adapting the 
architecture proposed in Perl et al.7. The input was the upper triangular dFCs (as each dFC is symmetric). Then, 
the encoder part used two hidden fully connected layers (512 and 256 units, respectively) with ReLU activation 
functions, and the decoder part was implemented with the same structure. The dimension of the latent space 
corresponds to common neurobiological assumptions made when studying disorders of consciousness22–24. 
Furthermore, we compared our models with the sparse VAE (sVAE)25, initialized with thirty-two latent 
dimensions. The sVAE implemented a variational dropout to enforce parsimony and interpretability in the latent 
representations. A threshold on the dropout rates was used to select the optimal number of latent dimensions. 
We also applied a baseline machine learning model, the probabilistic PCA (PPCA)26, and compared the results 
to those obtained with VAE/sVAE. Indeed, PPCA can be considered as a latent variable model. Its assumptions 
are Gaussian distributions and linear decomposition. The purpose of adding this model was to assess the interest 
in nonlinear models such as VAE or sVAE when working with small datasets.
Model training
We trained the VAE and sVAE using an Adam optimizer, with a learning rate starting at 0.001 and a 10% decay 
every 30 epochs. To limit overfitting during the training, we included early stopping. The model was trained 
on the training set until its error on the validation set increased, at which point the optimization stopped. As a 
performance measure to monitor the stopping of training, we considered the sliding median using a 10 epoch 
interval. In addition, the patience argument allowed training to continue for up to 15 epochs after convergence. 
This gave the training process a chance to get over flat areas or find additional improvements. We used a batch 
size of 128. Using cross-validation, we studied the effect of the β regularization parameter for the VAE by 
performing a grid search to determine the better choice for β ∈[0.5, 20] with the following user-defined steps 
[0.5, 1, 4, 7, 10, 20]. With the intention of building an interpretable model, we kept eight models: PPCA1
, PPCA2, PPCA3, VAE1, VAE2, VAE3 with 1, 2, and 3 latent dimensions respectively, sVAE, and PPCA 
with the same number of latent variables selected by the sVAE. We performed a leave-one-subject-out to create 
an independent test set and a training set with an internal 5-fold cross-validation. In the cross-validation, the 
stratification of the experimental conditions further strengthens the distribution of the classes in each training 
split. In the end, only the weights associated with the best validation fold were evaluated on the independent 
test set.
The labels and pseudo-labels used were the experimental conditions (awake and the different anesthetics), 
and the brain patterns (BPs) ranked in ascending order of similarity to the structural connectivity (numbered 
1–7), respectively. Briefly, the use of seven brain patterns has been shown to be effective in representing the 
different configurations of the brain3,4. Choosing the optimal number of brain patterns is challenging. It results 
from balancing biological assumptions and computational evaluations. These labels are known to be unevenly 
distributed across experimental conditions. They are also known to be good descriptors of spontaneous 
fluctuations in brain activity.
Model evaluation
Choosing an appropriate model is a trade-off between compressing only essential information and preserving 
data reconstruction. Thus, we evaluated the models using two distinct metrics. The first metric was a measure 
of the reconstruction quality. The second one was a measure of the regularity of the latent space organization, 
calculated using a classification task. Both used as labels the seven brain patterns previously described3,4.
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
4
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Reconstruction quality
From the retained trained generative models, we computed the decoded dFC matrices 
˜
X(i) associated with 
the test set. Instead of using the MSE training loss, we evaluated the Pearson product-moment correlation 
coefficients between the averaged decoded dFCs and empirical averaged dFCs associated with each label. The 
Pearson correlation was calculated by taking the upper triangular elements of the z-transformed averaged FCs 
because the FC values are symmetric with respect to the diagonal. In addition to this metric, we measured 
reconstruction quality with two other metrics, SSIM27,28 and geodesic distance29. This metric ranges from −1 
to 1, inclusive, where 1 is a perfect match. Note that this metric is used only during the evaluation of the model.
Classification accuracy
From the retained trained models, we also computed the latent representations associated with the test set. In 
addition to the BP labels available from the dataset, we also matched each test dFC latent space location to its 
nearest location in the train set and retained the corresponding matched label. Balanced accuracy (BAcc) was 
then used to compare the dataset and matched BP labels. The BAcc is defined as the average of recall obtained on 
each class, as in the Scikit Learn Python library30–32.
Consensus metric
We proposed a consensus metric M, which is an average between reconstruction quality metric and BAcc. The 
goal was to enforce a trade-off that imposed spatial coherence in the latent space without significantly degrading 
the reconstruction quality.
Latent space exploration
Discrete and continuous descriptors
All the information we can transfer in latent space is associated with encoder-generated representations and is 
discrete by nature. Semantically continuous representations are required to build a comprehensive whole-brain 
computational model. With the generative capabilities of the VAE (or generative models in general), it is possible 
to decode the entire latent space. Without losing generality, let us give the formula in 2D. Let’s consider a discrete 
grid G ∈R2 with g × g latent samples and the associated decoded dFCs ˜
Xlm, with l ∈[1, g] and m ∈[1, g]
. Using the previously known information on the brain patterns, we could label each ˜
Xlm. To this end, and as 
suggested by Perl et al.7, we computed the similarity between each ˜
Xlm and each brain pattern. To assess the 
strength of these associations, we used Pearson’s correlation. At the end, the label assigned to ˜
Xlm is the number 
of the most correlated brain pattern. The obtained continuous labeling reflects the functional reconfiguration 
of the brain.
Confidence level of continuous descriptors
In addition, by quantifying the best association strength, we proposed to compute confidence and reliability 
maps associated with the continuous descriptor generation process. First, the confidence map CM was derived 
at each latent space location (l, m) by taking the average of the difference between the two largest associations 
and the correlation between the two closest brain patterns. Let 
¯
BP lm =
¯
BP lm
1 , ...,
¯
BP lm
7 be the set of brain 
patterns ranked in ascending order of similarity to the decoded dFCs ˜
Xlm and R is the Pearson correlation. The 
confidence map CM is given by:
	
CMlm = 1
2
(
(R( ˜
Xlm,
¯
BP lm
1 ) −R( ˜
Xlm,
¯
BP lm
2 )) + R(
¯
BP lm
1 ,
¯
BP lm
2 )
)
This metric considers both the reluctance to label and the objective nature of that reluctance. The model is 
reasonably confident when CMlm ≈0.5, and overconfident when CMlm ≈1.0. Second, the reliability map 
RM was expressed at each latent space location by decoding the dFC and targeting the brain pattern with the 
highest Pearson correlation:
	
RMlm = R( ˜
Xlm,
¯
BP lm
1 )
(5)
The higher RMlm, the more reliable the model is.
Connection-wise simulations
The receptive field analysis
If we consider brain dynamics as a physical process characterized by gradual changes in the FC space, then 
the dFCs used are samples of these changes. Physicists tried to model these processes in a principled way by 
analytically identifying prior knowledge about the underlying processes, e.g., by using differential equations33. 
Instead of incorporating physical knowledge into a deep neural network, we proposed a receptive field (RF) 
simulation paradigm to generate a tensor model of latent space and thus gain insight into its dynamics. Such 
a characterization of latent space is essential for building an interpretable model, and it can help understand 
encoded latent trajectories between states of consciousness. We proposed to capture the latent space RF at the 
connection level. In this way, the proposed RF analysis could identify the connections that need to be disrupted 
to move from one state of consciousness to another.
In more detail, the RF analysis focused on the trained VAE (or another generative model) encoder. A 
perturbation was simulated at each connection j ∈[1, d] of an input dFC matrix X(i) (Fig. 2-A). The effect of 
this perturbation on the encoded latent representations was tracked (Fig. 2-B)16. In particular, the simulation 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
5
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

modified a single connection value x(i)
j p times, by swapping its value with a correlation drawn uniformly in an 
interval [−1, 1], while keeping the other connections fixed. In two dimensions, the latter simulation yielded p 
latent encoded vectors z(i)
j
= {z(i)
j1 ,..., z(i)
jp } ∈Rp×d. The generated latent samples z(i)
j were distributed around 
a line of varying length. This specific behavior allowed an interesting parameterization of each perturbation, 
using polar (in 2 dimensions) or spherical (in 3 dimensions) coordinates, through the inclinations θ(i)
j (Fig. 2-
B). The perturbation of all connections returned a cloud of points describing the RF. The resulting cloud had an 
ellipsoidal shape E, estimated with a confidence interval of 0.01. E can be parameterized by its sorted eigenvalues 
λi and associated eigenvectors ⃗ei, i ∈[1, N], where N is the latent dimension. Finally, since each connection can 
be related to a direction by the inclination angle θ(i)
j , it was possible to select the connections with high potential 
for action (i.e., generating the highest brain transitions when perturbed) by identifying the directions aligned 
with the first eigenvector ⃗e1 of the ellipsoid E. The procedure described above can be applied to any dFC. Any 
dFC can be projected onto a point in latent space around which an ellipsoid representing the effect of all possible 
unit perturbations was computed.
The ablation analysis
In machine learning, feature ablation study allows to find the importance of features in a model. In our case, 
we observed how removing a subnetwork affects the model’s latent representations and performances. Such a 
technique helped us to identify which subnetworks contribute to the anesthesia-induced loss of consciousness. 
Stemming from our previous work in which we identified fundamental networks underlying consciousness in 
the macaque brain34,35, we virtually inactivated specific brain areas. We tested the ability of the trained VAE to 
predict transitions across consciousness levels efficiently. For this, we simulated specific inactivations/ablations 
of functional connections between brain areas as a virtual experiment. The resulting dFC representations were 
then used to predict the state of consciousness. Using the framework of the Global Neuronal Workspace (GNW) 
theory of consciousness, we previously identified major brain areas (referred to as “macaque GNW nodes”) 
that account for the cortical signature of consciousness realizing a fronto-parieto-cingular network34,35. The key 
brain regions whose associated connections were zeroed in this study were the posterior cingulate cortex (CCp), 
the anterior cingulate cortex (CCa), the intraparietal cortex (PCip), the frontal eye field (FEF), the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex (PFCdl), the prefrontal polar cortex (PFCpol) and the dorsolateral premotor cortex (PMCdl) 
of the left and right hemispheres4,35. Thus, we proposed a connection-wise ablation study, equivalent to a lesion 
perturbation, that removed the contribution of connections linked to these regions. It’s important to note 
that removing a region removes all connections associated with that region. By zeroing these connections, we 
expected to shift dFCs acquired in the awake state to an anesthetized state.
We trained an SVM classifier on the learned latent representations to predict the awake and anesthetized 
states. We then evaluated the performance of the classifier in predicting the awake state using the balance 
accuracy (BAcc). To focus on the effect of the proposed ablation and to eliminate any unrelated source of 
variability, the analysis was performed on the training set only. As input to the trained SVM, we took only the 
raw or perturbed awake dFCs (i.e., awake dFCs undergoing the ablation process) encoded with the VAE. We 
denoted the corresponding prediction scores as BAcc and 
˜
BAcc, respectively. To assess the specificity of zeroing 
Fig. 2.  Illustration of the two steps involved in the receptive field analysis. (A) From a dFC matrix X(i), or 
equivalently its upper terms x(i), two perturbations are performed on connections b (blue) and r (red) by 
swapping one connection with the following three correlations [−1, 0, 1] (p = 3). (B) Corresponding z(i)
b and 
z(i)
r latent representations (N = 2) follow lines and are summarized by their inclination angles with the x-axis 
 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
6
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

these nodes, we tested the null hypothesis that removing random connections did not result in a significant loss 
of prediction compared to targeted GNW-associated connections. Let G = 14 be the number of GNW nodes. 
Our goal was to modify G nodes that were not part of the GNW. The cardinality of the corresponding universe 
Ω of all possible combinations is large. Therefore, we drew a subset of M = 1000 samples from Ω without 
replacement. Finally, we evaluated the associated awake prediction performances 
¯
BAcc
i, i ∈[1, M]. Using this 
null distribution statistic, we computed a one-tailed empirical p-value for 
˜
BAcc by looking at the proportion of 
values less than or equal to the observed value when all GNW-related connections were removed36.
VAE maps the distribution of dFC to another distribution in a latent space. Technically, this mapping is only 
valid around the distribution of dFC you used for training. If the perturbed dFC pattern is out of distribution, 
then the mapping can be arbitrary. And further analyzing this mapped dots in this latent space may not be 
meaningful. For example, if the input is out of the training data distribution, the reconstructed loss with the 
decoder could be much larger compared to the ones that are in distribution. To test if the input is out-of-
distribution, we quantified the reconstruction loss after ablation compared with the reconstruction loss on the 
original data by calculating the difference between the two Pearson correlations.
Results
Model evaluation
In our experiments, the final number of epochs varied in the interval [159, 1359] when the early stopping 
criterion was applied. The variational dropout in the sVAE selected 15 of the 32 latent dimensions (see Appendix 
S1). To evaluate whether a low-dimensional VAE can achieve reasonable assumptions, we compared several 
generative models with different parameters (PPCA1, PPCA2, PPCA3, PPCA15, VAE1, VAE2, VAE3, and 
sVAE15/32). This allowed a quantification of how the latent representations stratify the brain patterns and how 
a model can reconstruct the input dFCs from the low-dimensional representations.
Balancing reconstruction quality and regularization
By looking at the Pearson correlation coefficient for all models (Fig. 3-A), we observed that (1) the chosen 
β had little effect on the VAE reconstructions, but (2) decreasing the latent space dimension degraded 
the reconstruction, and (3) nonlinear low-dimensional models had higher reconstruction quality. Higher 
dimensional models are expected to perform better because they capture more variability, resulting in a better 
reconstruction. We further quantified the decrease in reconstruction quality by comparing the VAE2 with the 
sVAE15/32. The cost of a low-dimensional, more interpretable model was approximately a 0.06-point decrease 
in Pearson correlation coefficient. It also appeared that a nonlinear model can reconstruct better with fewer 
latent dimensions. Monitoring the Pearson correlation coefficient brain pattern-wise also showed that not all 
brain patterns were reconstructed similarly with a Pearson correlation coefficient in the [0.55, 0.95] range (Fig. 
3-D). Interestingly, the reconstruction quality increased with the number associated with each brain pattern. 
Thus, the models reconstructed the brain patterns closer to the structural connectivity (with a simpler topology) 
more accurately. The trend observed is the same with the two other metrics (SSIM and geodesic distance) (see 
Fig. 4 & Appendix S7). Since geodesic distance is a dissimilarity metric, the higher it is, the more dissimilar the 
matrices.
Balancing classification accuracy and regularization
Monitoring the classification accuracy (Fig. 3-B), we observed that the BAcc (1) increased as β increased, (2) 
decreased as the latent space dimension decreased, except in high dimensions (i.e., for the sVAE15/32), and 
that (3) the linear PPCA baseline outperformed other models in high dimensions (PPCA15). Overall, the 
classification scores were relatively high for a seven-class classification problem. For all considered models, the 
BAcc scores ranged from 0.45 to 0.75 (to be compared to the theoretical chance level of 0.14). The classification 
accuracy metric favored the use of the highest regularization parameter (β = 20), which promotes coherence in 
the latent space. Furthermore, better performance (an increase of 0.06-point) and lower interfold variance were 
observed for the 3D VAE (VAE3) models. Notably, the sVAE15/32 performed poorly, suggesting that a few 
latent dimensions were preferable to encode the brain pattern information.
Balancing reconstruction and classification
As the number of latent dimensions increased, the model captured more variability, including noise. 
Furthermore, limiting the number of latent dimensions improved the brain pattern detection task. This trend 
confirmed that dFCs reflected the interplay of a small number of latent processes2,10. Looking at the consensus 
metric (Fig. 3-C), we specified the following model for the rest of the paper: a 2D VAE (VAE2) with a β = 20 
regularization parameter. Using these parameters, we enforced a trade-off that imposed spatial coherence in the 
latent space without significantly degrading the reconstruction quality. Finally, we showed that the reconstructed 
brain patterns (as the reconstructed dFCs averaged over the different brain patterns) recovered the dominant 
structures obtained with a k-means clustering of the dFCs (Fig. 4). The same model evaluation can be performed 
using experimental conditions as labels (see Appendix S2). To clarify the notation, the selected β20 −V AE2 
will be referred to as VAE in the following.
Latent space exploration
To investigate the potential of latent representations to decode states of consciousness, we considered two types 
of descriptors: discrete and continuous latent representations. The latter are exploited thanks to the generative 
properties of VAEs. Again, we focused on the stratification of latent representations according to brain patterns. 
We also considered the reliability of the generated continuous descriptors.
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
7
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Fig. 4.  The brain patterns (BPs) from the k-means clustering and after reconstruction with the selected 
β20 −V AE2 The distance between the original and reconstructed centroids is displayed, for various metrics. 
SSIM distance = 1 − SSIM; Correlation distance = 1 − Pearson correlation.
 
Fig. 3.  Brain pattern (BP) classification/reconstruction using VAE, PPCA, and sVAE models: (A) the Pearson 
correlation coefficient of BP-wise averaged dFCs with respect to the model parameters, (B) the balanced 
accuracy (BAcc) between the ground truth and the matched predicted label, (C) the proposed consensus 
metric M, and (D) the Pearson correlation coefficient recorded for each BP. In plots A, B, and C, the selected 
VAE2 is highlighted by a red bounding box. The dashed lines represent the trends obtained for each latent 
space dimension across the considered models.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
8
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Stratification of brain patterns
From the VAE encoder, we obtained discrete latent representations. The ground truth labels were the brain 
patterns ranked in ascending order of similarity to the structural connectivity (numbered from 1 to 7). We 
examined the discrete composition of the latent space using the brain pattern labels (Fig. 5-A) and the calculated 
lifetime (Fig. 5-B). The lifetime is defined as the time spent continuously in a brain pattern (i.e., when no 
transition is observed). Therefore, all dFCs on this time axis have the same lifetime. Our focus was on three main 
properties of latent space. First, the resulting discrete representations formed a cloud of points rather than a set 
of clearly separable clusters. Second, the generated latent representations were remarkably well stratified when 
looking at the brain pattern labels (Fig. 5-A). Each brain pattern was isolated while no constraint was enforced 
during training. To quantify the overlap between brain patterns, we chose the Dice similarity coefficient. The 
Dice metric yields values between 0 (no spatial overlap) and 1 (complete overlap)37. Overall, the average Dice 
metric remained relatively low (< 0.37±0.19), confirming that the spatial overlap between brain patterns was 
small (see Appendix S3 for details). Interestingly, brain pattern 7 (the one closest to the brain structure) occupied 
a central position in the representation space and had the highest Dice coefficient. Third, the central locations, 
aligned with brain pattern 7, had longer lifetimes (Fig. 5-B). Note that we verified the absence of subject bias 
prior to analysis and also illustrated the stratification of the learned latent space with respect to the experimental 
conditions (see Appendix S4). We also verified that the proposed VAE reliably encoded the dFC time courses 
while no constraint was enforced during training (see Appendix S5).
Toward a whole-brain computational model
By exploiting the generative capabilities of VAE, we obtained semantically continuous representations in the 
latent space, which promoted versatility. The generated continuous brain pattern labels covered the entire 
latent space. They also showed a pooled organization of the brain patterns (i.e., each brain pattern was mostly 
composed of a single connected component) (Fig. 6-A). The accuracy of the brain pattern matching process 
was measured by the confidence CM and the reliability RM maps. Interestingly, the most noteworthy trend 
was that brain pattern boundaries were less reliable than central locations (Fig. 6-C and D). With these maps, 
we gained confidence in using continuous descriptors in the latent space. Finally, decoding dFCs on a 19 × 19 
regularly sampled grid in the latent space highlighted the learned manifold structure. Noteworthy, it exhibited 
brain patterns gradient toward the origin (Fig. 6-B). Overall, the generated low-dimensional representations 
captured dynamic signatures of fluctuating wakefulness.
Connection-wise simulations
We used external perturbations to characterize the representation of different states of consciousness better. To 
this end, we first studied the shift in latent space induced by modifying a single connection of a dFC matrix. 
Using receptive field analysis, we could identify preferred directions for moving from one state to another. 
Fig. 5.  Discrete stratification of the latent space of the selected VAE into a base of (A) Brain Patterns 
(BPs)—the centroids from a seven-class k-means clustering on the dFCs and (B) lifetimes - the time spent 
continuously in the corresponding brain pattern. Note that the obtained BP stratification mainly shows 
non-overlapping clusters as quantified in Appendix S3. For the lifetimes, we discretize the values into three 
categories: the 25% longest (in red), the 25% shortest (in blue), and all others medium (in pink).
 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
9
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Second, we proposed an ablation analysis to ensure that dimension reduction preserves critical information 
about consciousness. For the latter, specific connections related to the regions highlighted by one of the major 
theories of consciousness (the GNW) were zeroed, and we examined the induced displacement in latent space.
Perturbation of connections to study transitions
Using connection-wise RF analysis, a tensor E was estimated at each latent space location. We proposed to focus 
on seven specific latent space locations that were obtained when encoding the seven brain patterns with the 
VAE (see the central plot in Fig. 7). From each obtained tensor, we characterized the overall potential for action 
(i.e., the chance of generating a brain pattern transition) by the mean diffusivity (MD) (obtained by averaging 
the tensor eigenvalues). We found that this potential for action was always present but was small, lying in the 
interval [0.0068, 0.023]. Nevertheless, all tensors obtained were anisotropic. Thus, it was possible to select the 
connections with the highest probability of generating a brain pattern transition. In this study, we kept twenty 
connections (see circular plots in Fig. 7). Interestingly, the MD for BP7 was minimal, making it a “stable” 
pattern (i.e., a perturbation of this pattern is unlikely to cause a shift in consciousness).
Ablation of connections for virtual experiments
First of all, to test if the input is out-of-distribution after the ablation, we quantified the reconstruction loss after 
ablation compared with the reconstruction loss on the original data. We did observe a loss of reconstruction, 
but this remains reasonable (around 0.2 correlation points) and the reconstruction similarity values remain 
high (around 0.8) (cf. Appendix S8). So we can watch what is happening in latent space without the risk of 
Fig. 6.  Continuous stratification of the latent space of the selected VAE and corresponding confidence and 
reliability maps: (A) continuous representation of the Brain Patterns (BPs), (B) decoded dFCs sampled using a 
regular 19 × 19 grid in the latent space, (C) estimated confidence map CM, and (D) estimated reliability map 
RM. A, C, and D used a regular 200 × 200 grid in the latent space.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
10
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

arbitrary mapping. This connection-wise ablation study showed an apparent decrease in BAcc in wakefulness 
prediction when the GNW-associated connections were removed (
˜
BAcc << BAcc in Fig. 8). As mentioned 
above, the zeroed connections involved brain regions that were considered part of a critical cortical network 
for consciousness. We verified the significance of this decrease compared to random connection-wise ablations 
(pval = 0.008). Thus, we showed that a realistic state transition can be obtained by modulating a network 
involved in consciousness. The connection-wise ablation study highlighted the relevance of the information 
captured in latent representations and supported the ability of the trained VAE to be an attractive computational 
model to decode and predict states of consciousness. To further support this claim, we consider two different 
combinations of GNW areas in the proposed ablation study. In the first experiment, we group anterior areas 
(FEF, PMCdl, CCa, PFCpol) and posterior areas (PCip, CCp, V1). The proposed experiment is part of the 
Fig. 7.  Results of RF analysis of the seven brain patterns and associated connections with a high potential for 
action. Using the proposed connection-wise RF analysis, a local perturbation model computed as an ellipse 
is derived at each encoded latent space location. Note that to improve readability, we scaled each ellipse. The 
associated mean diffusivity (MD) is calculated. For each ellipse, the twenty connections that cause the most 
displacement in the latent space are displayed using a circular layout. The connectivity plots were generated 
with MNE-Python: 1.6.038.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
11
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

heated debate about the role of the front and the back of the brain in the neural correlates of consciousness39. 
The obtained SVM scores are 0.57 and 0.62, respectively, indicating that both constructed subnetworks play 
almost the same role in conscious access and that partial ablation is insufficient for a change of consciousness 
state. Broad ablation is needed to force a transition between states of consciousness. In the second experiment, 
the GNW key areas are extended to include the primary sensory regions, primary somatosensory cortex S1, 
primary auditory cortex A1, and visual area V1. The addition of these areas further increases the transition to an 
anesthetized state and the statistical significance of the results (see Appendix S6—Fig. 1). This result is consistent 
with the literature where these areas have been shown to play an essential role in conscious access40.
Discussion
We proposed the VAE-VIENT framework as a tool to decode consciousness-related brain patterns from brain 
activity, to visualize their organization, and the transitions within the patterns that underlie states of consciousness 
in macaques. A VAE generative model has already been used to capture the different states of consciousness in a 
low-dimensional latent space. Here, we showed that such a model with tailored low-dimensional representations 
can be used to characterize brain dynamics over the dFCs. With low 2D-dimensional representations, the 
obtained performances were better than with other linear (here, the PPCA) and nonlinear (here, the sVAE) 
generative models. However, this trend was not confirmed in higher dimensions (especially in 15D). It is 
generally accepted that simple models of neural mechanisms can be remarkably effective. We showed that a 2D 
VAE model could (1) generate a latent feature space stratified into a base of brain patterns and (2) reconstruct 
new brain patterns coherently and stably despite the limited dataset size by exploiting the generative part of the 
model. We argued that the VAE-VIENT framework provided a simulation-based whole-brain computational 
model. Indeed, we showed that the tensor fields generated from the RF analysis could model brain pattern 
transitions and that the proposed ablation analysis provided a unique way to select target connections/regions 
non-invasively. These findings paved the way for medical applications such as depth of anesthesia monitoring, 
coma characterization, and accurate diagnosis of disorders of consciousness in patients.
Dataset and preprocessing limitations
The settings of this study have four major limitations. First, our dataset is relatively small, which increases 
the risk of overfitting. Tests on larger cohorts will be needed to validate our observations, as with studies of 
sleep and consciousness disorders in humans2,6,41 even if these datasets are also limited. However, they can be 
useful for validating the model with the ultimate goal of clinical translation. Second, we worked with sliding 
windows-based dFCs and not directly with time series. The former introduces hyperparameters that are not 
always easy to optimize42–44. In the proposed paper, we used a sliding time window of 35 TR (84 s) with sliding 
steps of 1 TR (2.4 s), as reported by Barttfeld and colleagues on the same dataset3. These two parameters were 
not optimized in our study. While a small window size may lead to increased sampling variability, a larger 
window size may reduce the sensitivity of the remaining analysis. In most studies, the recommended minimum 
was approximately 60 s2, even shorter according to recent research45. The empirical choice of Barttfeld and 
colleagues was within these recommendations. From a methodological point of view, working with sliding 
Fig. 8.  Ablation study performed from the GNW nodes. We evaluate the performance of a trained SVM 
classifier in predicting the awake state using balance accuracy (BAcc). As input, we take only the raw or 
perturbed awake dFCs. We denote the corresponding prediction scores as BAcc (vertical red dot line) and 
˜
BAcc (vertical blue dot line), respectively. We also display the histogram of 
¯
BAcc
i when random connections 
are removed.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
12
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

windows acts as a natural augmentation scheme that helps during the deep learning training on our limited 
dataset (5 monkeys—156 runs—72384 dFCs). Moreover, from a neuroscientific point of view, we aim to adhere 
to the dynamic representations of the brain originally described with dFCs3,4. Note that identical conclusions 
have been reached in humans, using a phase-based dynamic functional coordination analysis, suggesting only a 
small bias (if any) induced by sliding windows6. Third, tuning deep learning hyperparameters (such as learning 
rate or batch size) is critical to improve performance but is resource-intensive. In future work, sensitive analysis 
can be used to select the optimal values for each parameter using quantitative measures46. Finally, the NSM 
spatial preprocessing performs an affine alignment to the template space. The use of smoothing in combination 
with large cortical regions (as defined in the CoCoMac atlas) allows to deal with alignment inaccuracies. The 
resulting patterns are expected to be more robust and less sensitive to small variations in the signal.
Loss of information during compression process
This work uses VAE as a compression tool to map a high-dimensional dFC to a low-dimensional latent space. 
However, one of the VAE’s weak points is, in fact, its ability to reconstruct47, and so the compression process can 
lose a lot of information. Our benchmark quantifies precisely this loss of information, which had never been 
done in previous works, even those using almost the same model7,41. Our point is not to assert that the VAE 
chosen is the best compression tool to map a high dimensional dFC to a low dimensional latent space but to 
show that the loss of information, while existing, is not so great as to make the latent space uninterpretable. In 
the future, we could also improve the reconstruction by using a different formulation of the reconstruction term 
to penalize the generation of blurry images47.
Repertoire of brain patterns and arousal levels
Strikingly, the dimensional reduction with a 2D VAE could preserve the information related to each brain 
pattern. Furthermore, the comparison of brain patterns, using Pearson correlation similarity, clearly showed 
that similar brain patterns in the input space have closer latent representations (see Appendix S3, and Fig. 6-A). 
Looking at the last row of the correlation matrix between brain patterns, we saw that BP7 is highly correlated 
with BP3, BP4, BP5, and BP6. These patterns are also direct neighbors in latent space. Conversely, the less 
correlated BP1, and BP2 are not direct neighbors of BP7 in the latent space. Thus, the latent space can reveal 
the global structure of brain patterns. Moreover, the performance of brain pattern classification was better than 
that of arousal level classification (awake vs. anesthetized) (see Appendix S2). We observed a 0.05-point increase 
in classification performance. Given the difficulty of the task (i.e., a 7-class classification problem vs. a binary 
classification problem), the model seems to focus on the dynamic information shared between arousal levels. 
Similar conclusions were reached in our previous work3,4, where the brain pattern repertoire was described 
as a set of brain configurations that are unevenly distributed across arousal levels. In other words, compared 
to experimental conditions, brain patterns provide a more detailed description of states of consciousness. On 
the one hand, this property may be inherited from the nature of the input data. Indeed, dFCs can be directly 
associated with changes in consciousness over time2,4. On the other hand, the difference between levels of 
sedation (deep and moderate) in the present dataset is small (i.e., only a difference of one level on the monkey 
behavioral scale)4. Such a difference results in changes in reflexes (toe pinch, corneal reflex, shaking) but not 
in voluntary behavior (response to juice presentation). Therefore, establishing a direct relationship between 
a subject’s level of sedation and their level of consciousness may be a more difficult task than characterizing 
overall brain dynamics. In addition, previous studies on the same dataset have shown that all three anesthetics 
(propofol, sevoflurane, ketamine), despite different pharmacological molecular mechanisms, implied the same 
dynamics of cortical activity measured with dFCs4. Thus, it remains to be seen whether we cannot separate the 
different levels of consciousness because our data do not contain this information or because our modeling is 
inadequate.
Link between latent representations and neurobiology of consciousness
A remaining question concerns the link between these brain patterns/latent representations and the neurobiology 
of consciousness. Indeed, here, we studied brain dynamics using resting-state fMRI data acquired across different 
states of consciousness. K-means clustering could identify brain patterns that underlie the resting-state structure. 
Deep learning models (VAE-VIENT) could reconstruct dynamical functional connectivity maps and classify 
brain patterns. Low-dimensional latent representations could stratify the dynamic organization of the brain 
patterns and experimental conditions. Although we measured the behavioral arousal score in all experimental 
conditions and all monkeys, we can only speculate about the link between these representations and behavioral 
states. An exciting link could be provided by measuring the trajectory of brain patterns within the latent space 
across states of consciousness using a recently described approach48.
Generalizability of the findings to human subjects with disorders of consciousness
The advances proposed in this article are more methodological. The dimension reduction model and in silico 
perturbation studies could be applied to any connectivity matrix, whether from humans or animals. Given 
that a dynamic state repertoire associated with consciousness has also been found in humans6, the proposed 
results will likely be replicated, but further experiments would need to be performed. Studies in humans with 
dimension reduction models suggest that these models are promising for capturing the dynamics of conscious 
states7,41. Moreover, we previously identified a new biomarker of consciousness and its loss using dynamical fMRI 
approaches and structure-function similarity measures based on these exact same macaque monkey models3,4. 
This biomarker was directly translated to better characterize consciousness states in patients with disorders of 
consciousness6. Thus, although our model is developed using anesthesia-induced loss of consciousness, we are 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
13
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

confident that it holds potential for clinical applications in improving the diagnosis of patients with disorders of 
consciousness.
Temporal modeling
The main limitation of the current model is its inability to explicitly model the time course of the cerebral 
dynamics. We worked with dynamic FC matrices but did not consider their order in each run. However, 
inspired by Tseng et al.49, we investigated how a 2D VAE model encoded temporal information (see Appendix 
S5). Remarkably, the VAE-encoded latent variables had a coherent temporal structure that exhibited transitions 
characteristic of consciousness, even though no constraint was imposed during training. Other important 
features are the time spent consecutively in each pattern (previously called lifetime), the frequency of these steady 
states, and the associated transitions. Interestingly, and as described in the literature3, the brain pattern closest to 
the structure (BP7) was the most stable pattern with the longest lifetime. The latter also occupied a central place 
in the latent space around which other states were organized. The average lifetime of a metastable state, is lower 
in the awake state than in all other anesthetized states (see Appendix S5). It is also interesting to note that the 
distribution tails are significantly larger in the anesthetized states than in the awake state. Similarly, the number 
of transitions was higher in the awake state than in all other anesthetized states. Furthermore, there was almost 
no difference in the number of transitions between different levels of anesthesia or between different anesthetics. 
To interpret such results with more confidence, a time-dependent model seems essential. Some works have 
proposed modeling a time series with a VAE in the literature, where the encoder and decoder consisted of 
LSTMs50. Other works abandoned the generative property and the decoder. For example, CEBRA is a contrastive 
learning technique that allows label-informed time series analysis51. CEBRA jointly uses auxiliary variables and 
neural data in a hypothesis-driven manner to generate consistent, time-aware latent representations. In all cases, 
the goal remains the same: to obtain a consistent picture of the latent space that drives activity and behavior. In 
future work, we plan to consider the time course directly in the learning phase.
Performing virtual experiments
An interesting finding was the ability of the VAE model to simulate shifts in states of consciousness induced by 
selective virtual ablation of connectivity between pairs of brain areas or even ablation of connectivity within a 
more extended network. Historically, ablation techniques have been used in animal models to test the function 
of brain areas. For example, ablation techniques have directly linked vision to the occipital lobe and auditory 
function to the temporal lobe52,53. However, physical ablation/deactivation techniques are either irreversible or 
invasive and lack spatial resolution and specificity, highlighting the need for virtual ablation capabilities through 
the development of brain simulators54. Very few studies have been able to simulate the deactivation of global 
brain networks to suppress consciousness. Here, we presented a model capable of simulating a virtual experiment 
in which deactivation of the “macaque GNW network” leads to suppression of consciousness. But, it is not yet 
known whether out-of-distribution data can be accurately represented in latent spaces. However, because of this 
uncertainty, we explored manipulating the original data and observed what happened in the latent space. The 
similarity between the anesthetized brain signature and the modulated dataset signature both in latent space 
was certainly intriguing and reassuring. However, this raises a potential issue. The observed similarity does not 
rule out alternative interpretations or explanations for the brain states of anesthetized monkeys. Conversely, any 
differences that may arise do not necessarily indicate a failure to represent the anesthetized brain states correctly. 
This question requires further investigation, with more refined and improved methods in future studies, even if 
we believe this simulation strengthens the model’s capabilities and opens up further virtual experiments that can, 
for example, test the specific effects of brain stimulation on consciousness55.
Towards new biomarkers of consciousness
The 2D VAE model demonstrated its ability to retain information about regions involved in conscious processing, 
showing that disrupting the “GNW nodes” causes a switch from a conscious to an unconscious state. It should 
be noted that only virtual inactivation of the entire “GNW network” (and not inactivation of individual node-
related connections or sub-networks, see Appendix S6) caused a consciousness transition. We focused on the 
GNW nodes for a specific reason here. We previously determined those nodes in the macaque monkey using 
the “local-global” auditory task34. We don’t have an equivalent for other theories nodes in the macaque monkey. 
However, in future work, it would be highly original to apply our new model to compare node modulation results 
across different theories of consciousness in the context of the current international initiative56. We can also 
imagine testing other networks simply by trial-and-error simulations. Setting all links connected to GNW nodes 
to zero is one of the limitations of the proposed ablation simulation. Setting all connections to zero is unrealistic, 
and perhaps certain connections should be privileged (using a weighted modulation of true connection values). 
We can use a more realistic perturbation scheme instead of setting all selected connections to zero in the ablation 
analysis. Bootstrapping techniques or model-driven approaches are possible alternatives. The latter allows the 
question of in silico perturbation protocols to be considered55,57. They can lead to a better understanding of 
the underlying mechanisms of brain dynamics. In addition, these tools can be used to test different scenarios 
virtually. Of course, there is still work to do to validate the realism of these scenarios. Conversely, it would be 
of great interest to show the opposite effect, i.e., to find the regions that should be stimulated to switch from an 
unconscious to a conscious state. As suggested by41, this goal is challenging and probably requires simulation. 
Further analysis of connection-wise RF latent space structure modeling will be valuable in this context. The 
RF analysis highlighted the different patterns that reflect the dynamics of the brain (biological markers). The 
ellipsoids obtained in our work described the most plausible connections to perturb to redirect trajectories 
and potentially restore wakefulness. In the long run, such an analysis may be a tool to simulate the recovery 
of consciousness at the individual level. Studying the sequences of different trajectories in latent space paved 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
14
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

the way for a whole-brain computational model of conscious access. In other words, RF analysis provided the 
unique ability to directly identify the pairs of nodes involved in consciousness from the data. The proposed RF 
analysis aims to perturb a connection and observe how this perturbation affects the reconstructed dFC pattern. 
However, the perturbation scheme, which consists of modifying one connection at a time, needs to be refined, 
and the observed small effect size needs to be investigated. A first, albeit simplistic, alternative to perturbing an 
input connection is to sample linearly between percentiles of the connection distribution or bootstrap values 
across samples. Conversely, assuming our generative VAE model is properly trained, we can use the likelihood 
distribution of observations conditioned on the latent variable learned from the data to simulate realistic 
perturbations58. In reality, changing multiple connections simultaneously may have a more significant effect. 
Thus, navigating between states of consciousness using such a technique will require further work.
Finally, we believe numerous clinical and scientific applications exist. First, this approach allows the description 
of new biomarkers of consciousness. In addition, it is a unique tool to simulate the consequences of targeted 
modulation of specific brain regions for the loss or recovery of consciousness. In this context, we hypothesize 
that the latent space structure will be essential for dissecting the mechanisms of Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) 
for disorders of consciousness and help to build a general predictive model of the global brain effects of DBS.
Data availibility
All data and codes needed to evaluate the paper’s conclusions are publicly available at ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​z​e​n​o​d​o​.​o​r​g​/​r​e​c​o​r​
d​s​/​1​0​4​2​3​7​2​5​.​
Received: 8 April 2024; Accepted: 16 October 2024
References
	 1.	 James, W. The principles of psychology, Vol I. The principles of psychology, Vol I. (Henry Holt and Co, New York, NY, US, 1890). 
Pages: xii, 697.
	 2.	 Allen, E. A. et al. Tracking whole-brain connectivity dynamics in the resting state. Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y.: 1991) 24, 
663–676, https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs352 (2014).
	 3.	 Barttfeld, P. et al. Signature of consciousness in the dynamics of resting-state brain activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 19 (2015).
	 4.	 Uhrig, L. et al. Resting-state dynamics as a cortical signature of anesthesia in monkeys. Anesthesiology 129, 942–958. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​9​7​/​A​L​N​.​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​2​3​3​6​ (2018).
	 5.	 Preti, M. G., Bolton, T. A. & Van De Ville, D. The dynamic functional connectome: State-of-the-art and perspectives. NeuroImage160, 
41–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.12.061 (2017).
	 6.	 Demertzi, A. et al. Human consciousness is supported by dynamic complex patterns of brain signal coordination. Sci. Adv. 5, 
eaat7603. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat7603 (2019).
	 7.	 Perl, Y. S. et al. Generative embeddings of brain collective dynamics using variational autoencoders. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 238101. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.238101 (2020).
	 8.	 Misra, J. et al. Learning brain dynamics for decoding and predicting individual differences. PLOS Comput. Biol. 17, e1008943. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008943 (2021). Publisher: Public Library of Science.
	 9.	 Gao, S., Mishne, G. & Scheinost, D. Nonlinear manifold learning in functional magnetic resonance imaging uncovers a low-
dimensional space of brain dynamics. Human Brain Mapping 42, 4510–4524. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.25561 (2021).
	10.	 Monti, R. P. et al. Decoding time-varying functional connectivity networks via linear graph embedding methods. Front. Comput. 
Neurosci. 11 (2017).
	11.	 Cunningham, J. P. & Yu, B. M. Dimensionality reduction for large-scale neural recordings. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 1500–1509. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​
o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​8​/​n​n​.​3​7​7​6​ (2014). Number: 11 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
	12.	 Kim, J.-H. et al. Representation learning of resting state fMRI with variational autoencoder. NeuroImage241, 118423. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​n​e​u​r​o​i​m​a​g​e​.​2​0​2​1​.​1​1​8​4​2​3​ (2021).
	13.	 Zhao, Q. et al. Variational Autoencoder with Truncated Mixture of Gaussians for Functional Connectivity Analysis. in (Chung, A. 
C. S., Gee, J. C., Yushkevich, P. A. & Bao, S. Eds.) Information Processing in Medical Imaging, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
867–879, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-20351-1_68 (Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019).
	14.	 Sert, N. P. d. et al. Reporting animal research: Explanation and elaboration for the ARRIVE guidelines 2.0. PLOS Biol. 18, e3000411. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000411 (2020). Publisher: Public Library of Science.
	15.	 Bakker, R., Wachtler, T. & Diesmann, M. CoCoMac 2.0 and the future of tract-tracing databases. Front. Neuroinform. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​3​3​8​9​/​f​n​i​n​f​.​2​0​1​2​.​0​0​0​3​0​ (2012). Publisher: Frontiers.
	16.	 Liu, R. et al. A generative modeling approach for interpreting population-level variability in brain structure. bioRxiv 
2020.06.04.134635, https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.134635 (2020). Publisher: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Section: New 
Results.
	17.	 Qiang, N., Dong, Q., Sun, Y., Ge, B. & Liu, T. Deep Variational Autoencoder for Modeling Functional Brain Networks and ADHD 
Identification. In 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), 554–557, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​I​S​B​I​4​5​
7​4​9​.​2​0​2​0​.​9​0​9​8​4​8​0​ (2020). ISSN: 1945-8452.
	18.	 Seninge, L., Anastopoulos, I., Ding, H. & Stuart, J. VEGA is an interpretable generative model for inferring biological network 
activity in single-cell transcriptomics. Nat. Commun. 12, 5684, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26017-0 (2021). Number: 1 
Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
	19.	 Kingma, D. P. & Welling, M. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. arXiv:1312.6114 [cs, stat] (2014).
	20.	 Higgins, I. et al. beta-VAE: Learning Basic Visual Concepts With A Constrained Variational Framework. ICLR 22 (2017).
	21.	 Burgess, C. P. et al. Understanding disentangling in beta-VAE. arXiv:1804.03599 [cs, stat] (2018).
	22.	 Plum, F. & Posner, J. B. The Diagnosis of Stupor and Coma (Oxford University Press, 1982). Google-Books-ID: Pbl4CH4NlQsC.
	23.	 Laureys, S. The neural correlate of (un)awareness: Lessons from the vegetative state. Trends Cognit. Sci. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​t​
i​c​s​.​2​0​0​5​.​1​0​.​0​1​0​ (2005).
	24.	 Demertzi, A., Laureys, S. & Boly, M. Coma, persistent vegetative states, and diminished consciousness. Encyclopedia Consciousness. 
147 (2009).
	25.	 Antelmi, L., Ayache, N., Robert, P. & Lorenzi, M. Sparse multi-channel variational autoencoder for the joint analysis of 
heterogeneous data. in International Conference on Machine Learning, 302–311 (PMLR, 2019).
	26.	 Tipping, M. E. & Bishop, C. M. Probabilistic principal component analysis. J. R. Stat. Soc. Series B 61, 611–622 (1999).
	27.	 Wang, Z. & Bovik, A. C. Mean squared error: Love it or leave it? A new look at Signal Fidelity Measures. IEEE Signal Processing 
Magazine 26, 98–117, https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2008.930649 (2009). Conference Name: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine.
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
15
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

	28.	 Wang, Z., Bovik, A., Sheikh, H. & Simoncelli, E. Image quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE 
Trans. Image Process. 13, 600–612, https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2003.819861 (2004). Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on 
Image Processing.
	29.	 Venkatesh, M., Jaja, J. & Pessoa, L. Comparing functional connectivity matrices: A geometry-aware approach applied to participant 
identification. NeuroImage207, 116398. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116398 (2020).
	30.	 Guyon, I. et al. Design of the 2015 ChaLearn AutoML challenge. In 2015 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks 
(IJCNN), 1–8, https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2015.7280767 (2015). ISSN: 2161-4407.
	31.	 Mosley, L. A balanced approach to the multi-class imbalance problem. Ph.D. thesis, schoolIowa State University (2013).
	32.	 Kelleher, J. D., Namee, B. M. & D’Arcy, A. Fundamentals of Machine Learning for Predictive Data Analytics (The MIT Press, 2015).
	33.	 Deco, G., Kringelbach, M. L., Jirsa, V. K. & Ritter, P. The dynamics of resting fluctuations in the brain: Metastability and its 
dynamical cortical core. Sci. Rep. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-03073-5 (2017).
	34.	 Uhrig, L., Dehaene, S. & Jarraya, B. A hierarchy of responses to auditory regularities in the macaque brain. J. Neurosc. 34, 1127–
1132. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3165-13.2014 (2014).
	35.	 Uhrig, L., Janssen, D., Dehaene, S. & Jarraya, B. Cerebral responses to local and global auditory novelty under general anesthesia. 
NeuroImage 141, 326–340. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.08.004 (2016).
	36.	 Ojala, M. & Garriga, G. C. Permutation Tests for Studying Classifier Performance. In 2009 Ninth IEEE International Conference on 
Data Mining, 908–913. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDM.2009.108 (IEEE, Miami Beach, FL, USA, 2009).
	37.	 Dice, L. R. Measures of the amount of ecologic association between species. Ecology 26, 297–302. https://doi.org/10.2307/1932409 
(1945). Publisher: Ecological Society of America.
	38.	 Gramfort, A. et al. MEG and EEG data analysis with MNE-Python. Front. Neurosci. 7 (2013).
	39.	 Boly, M. et al. Are the neural correlates of consciousness in the front or in the back of the cerebral cortex? clinical and neuroimaging 
evidence. J. Neurosci.37, 9603–9613 (2017).
	40.	 Uhrig, L. et al. Resting-state dynamics as a cortical signature of anesthesia in monkeys. Anesthesiology 129, 942–958. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​9​7​/​A​L​N​.​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​0​2​3​3​6​ (2018).
	41.	 Perl, Y. S. et al. Low-dimensional organization of global brain states of reduced consciousness. Cell Rep. 42, 112491. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​
g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​c​e​l​r​e​p​.​2​0​2​3​.​1​1​2​4​9​1​ (2023).
	42.	 Shakil, S., Lee, C.-H. & Keilholz, S. D. Evaluation of sliding window correlation performance for characterizing dynamic functional 
connectivity and brain states. NeuroImage 133, 111–128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.02.074 (2016).
	43.	 Savva, A. D., Kassinopoulos, M., Smyrnis, N., Matsopoulos, G. K. & Mitsis, G. D. Effects of motion related outliers in dynamic 
functional connectivity using the sliding window method. J. Neurosci. Methods 330, 108519. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​n​e​u​m​e​t​h​.​2​
0​1​9​.​1​0​8​5​1​9​ (2020).
	44.	 Mokhtari, F., Akhlaghi, M. I., Simpson, S. L., Wu, G. & Laurienti, P. J. Sliding window correlation analysis: Modulating window 
shape for dynamic brain connectivity in resting state. NeuroImage 189, 655–666. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.02.001 
(2019).
	45.	 Lurie, D. J. et al. Questions and controversies in the study of time-varying functional connectivity in resting fMRI. Netw. Neurosci. 
4, 30–69 (2020).
	46.	 Taylor, R., Ojha, V., Martino, I. & Nicosia, G. Sensitivity Analysis for Deep Learning: Ranking Hyper-parameter Influence. in 2021 
IEEE 33rd International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI), 512–516, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​9​/​I​C​T​A​I​5​2​5​2​5​.​2​0​2​
1​.​0​0​0​8​3​ (2021).
	47.	 Bredell, G., Flouris, K., Chaitanya, K., Erdil, E. & Konukoglu, E. Explicitly Minimizing the Blur Error of Variational Autoencoders, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.05939 (2023). ArXiv:2304.05939 [cs, eess].
	48.	 Huang, S.-G., Samdin, S. B., Ting, C.-M., Ombao, H. & Chung, M. K. Statistical model for dynamically-changing correlation 
matrices with application to brain connectivity. J. Neurosci. Methods 331, 108480. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2019.108480 
(2020).
	49.	 Tseng, J. & Poppenk, J. Brain meta-state transitions demarcate thoughts across task contexts exposing the mental noise of trait 
neuroticism. Nat. Commun 11, 3480, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17255-9 (2020). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing 
Group.
	50.	 Lin, S. et al. Anomaly Detection for Time Series Using VAE-LSTM Hybrid Model. in ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE International 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 4322–4326, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP40776.2020.9053558 
(IEEE, Barcelona, Spain, 2020).
	51.	 Schneider, S., Lee, J. H. & Mathis, M. W. Learnable latent embeddings for joint behavioural and neural analysis. Nature617, 360–
368. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06031-6 (2023). Number: 7960 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
	52.	 Panizza, B. Osservazioni sul nervo ottico. Gior. I. R. Ist Lomb. Sci. Lett. Arti. 7 237–252. (1855).
	53.	 Munk, H. Of the visual area of the cerebral cortex, and its relation to eye movements. Brain 13, 45–70. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​9​3​/​b​r​a​
i​n​/​1​3​.​1​.​4​5​ (1890).
	54.	 Fan, X. & Markram, H. A Brief history of simulation neuroscience. Front. Neuroinform.13 (2019).
	55.	 Deco, G. et al. Awakening: Predicting external stimulation to force transitions between different brain states. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
116, 18088–18097. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1905534116 (2019).
	56.	 Melloni, L. et al. An adversarial collaboration protocol for testing contrasting predictions of global neuronal workspace and 
integrated information theory. PLOS One 18, 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0268577 (2023).
	57.	 Dabagia, M., Kording, K. P. & Dyer, E. L. Comparing high-dimensional neural recordings by aligning their low-dimensional latent 
representations (2022).
	58.	 Ambroise, C., Grigis, A., Houenou, J. & Frouin, V. Interpretable and integrative deep learning for discovering brain-behaviour 
associations with stability analysis (2024). Working paper or preprint.
Acknowledgements
We thank Morgan Dupont for help with animal experiments, Alexis Amadon, Hauke Kolster, Laurent Laribière, 
and the NeuroSpin MRI and informatics teams for help with imaging tools, Christophe Joubert and Jean-Marie 
Helies for animal facilities, and Jean-Robert Deverre for support.
Author contributions
B.J. and L.U. conceived and designed the experiments, B.J. and L.U. collected the data, C.G. and A.G. analyzed 
the data, A.G. and C.G. wrote the paper, and V.F. and E.D. contributed to the critical appraisal of the paper. All 
authors reviewed the manuscript.
Funding
This work was supported by Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, the Inserm Avenir pro­
gram (to B.J.), Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique, Foundation Bettencourt-Schueller, French National Research 
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
16
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Agency for the project Big2Small (Chair in AI, ANR-19-CHIA-0010-01), the project RHU-PsyCARE (French 
government’s “Investissements d’Avenir” program, ANR-18-RHUS-0014), and European Union’s Horizon 2020 
for the project R-LiNK (H2020-SC1-2017, 754907).
Declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​0​3​8​/​s​4​1​5​9​8​-​0​2​4​-​7​6​6​9​5​-​1​.​
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.G., B.J. or A.G.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in 
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide 
a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have 
permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence 
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to 
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​
n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/​.​
© The Author(s) 2024  
Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:31606 
17
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76695-1
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
