ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 08 October 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.530152
Edited by:
Christopher Gutland,
Sun Yat-sen University, China
Reviewed by:
Koji Ota,
Niigata University, Japan
Garrett Mindt,
Central European University, Hungary
*Correspondence:
Takuya Niikawa
niitaku11@gmail.com
†Present address:
Takuya Niikawa,
Graduate School of Humanities, Kobe
University, Kobe, Japan
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Consciousness Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 28 January 2020
Accepted: 02 September 2020
Published: 08 October 2020
Citation:
Niikawa T (2020) A Map
of Consciousness Studies: Questions
and Approaches.
Front. Psychol. 11:530152.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.530152
A Map of Consciousness Studies:
Questions and Approaches
Takuya Niikawa1,2*†
1 Institut Jean Nicod, ENS, Paris, France, 2 Faculty of Humanities and Human Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
This article aims to present a map of consciousness studies, which consists of a
list of fundamental questions about consciousness and existing approaches to them.
The question list includes ﬁve fundamental categories: Deﬁnitional, Phenomenological,
Epistemological, Ontological, and Axiological. Each fundamental category is divided into
more determinate questions. Existing approaches to each question are also classiﬁed
into a few groups, presenting principal researchers who take each kind of approach. In
the ﬁnal section, I demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed map of consciousness
studies by applying it to examine the integrated information theory and the global
workspace theory of consciousness.
Keywords: consciousness, consciousness science, philosophy of consciousness, approach to consciousness,
questions about consciousness
INTRODUCTION
Academic research starts with research questions. An area of research typically develops by research
questions being sophisticated, in particular, those being conceptually clariﬁed and being divided
into more determinate questions. In the philosophy of language, for instance, the research question
of “what is the meaning of symbols?” was divided into two diﬀerent types of questions, namely,
the question about semantics—“what is the meaning of this or that symbol (for a particular person
or group)?”—and the question about foundation—“in virtue of what facts about that person or
group does the symbol have that meaning?” (Speaks, 2019, sec. 1). This division has helped us
to develop theories of meaning without confusion. In linguistics, likewise, the research question of
“what is the linguistic capacity?” can be divided into two distinct questions, namely, the competence
question—“what is the linguistic competence?”—and the performance question—“what is the
linguistic performance ability?” (Chomsky, 2014). This distinction helps us to develop theories of
linguistic capacities while avoiding unnecessary confusion.
Consciousness studies have rapidly developed in the last three decades; many philosophical
and scientiﬁc theories of consciousness have been proposed. However, it is far less clear how
such theories of consciousness are related to each other. Some theories target diﬀerent aspects
of consciousness; some theories address the same aspect of consciousness but with diﬀerent
methodologies. Consider two inﬂuential scientiﬁc theories of consciousness, the integrated
information theory (IIT) (Tononi, 2008; Tononi et al., 2016) and the global workspace theory
(GWT) (Baars, 2005; Dehaene, 2014). Although many assume that they are competitive, it is
unclear whether they are concerned with the same research subject in the ﬁrst place (Ball, 2019).
Given that there already exist many theories of consciousness, and it is far less clear how they
are related, we need to stop trying to answer a speciﬁc research question set out in a theoretical
framework for a moment and instead take research questions about consciousness themselves as the
target of investigation. In other words, a second-order investigation of the research questions about
consciousness is required to further develop consciousness studies.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
As an initial step of the second-order investigation, this article
presents a systematic list of questions about consciousness (see
section “The List of Questions”). This list helps us to understand
what questions the existing theories of consciousness address. In
addition, the list helps each consciousness researcher to see what
aspects of consciousness they are interested in.
After proposing a list of questions about consciousness,
I also submit a list of approaches to each question (see section
“The List of Approaches”). The list of approaches gives us the
methodological overview of consciousness studies. It also helps
researchers working in various ﬁelds to see what question they
can tackle in their methodological/theoretical frameworks.
The list of questions is constructed by a top–down approach.
I apply the traditional taxonomy of philosophical inquiries to
categorize questions about consciousness. Thus, the proposed
classiﬁcatory framework is neither arbitrary nor groundless. The
list of approaches is constructed by a bottom–up approach. I take
the existing approaches to each kind of question and then classify
them based on their crucial methodological diﬀerences.
The ﬁnal section of this article is dedicated to demonstrate the
usefulness of the map of consciousness studies, which consists
of the lists of questions and approaches, by applying it to
examine IIT and GWT. I will argue that the proposed map is
useful in that it can provide a multidimensional framework in
which to compare various scientiﬁc theories of consciousness,
including IIT and GWT.
THE LIST OF QUESTIONS
Philosophical inquiries have typically been divided into three
categories: Ontological, Epistemological, and Axiological (Lee,
1966, p. 72; Wole´nski, 2004, p. 3). In addition to this traditional
distinction, I incorporate two other fundamental categories into
the classiﬁcatory framework for questions about consciousness,
namely,
Deﬁnitional
and
Phenomenological.
Deﬁnitional
inquiries explore satisfactory deﬁnitions of key concepts, such
as “good” and “knowledge.” The term “consciousness” is also a
target of this inquiry. Phenomenology is a discipline in which
to investigate conscious phenomena from the subjective point
of view, which is typically distinguished from other disciplines
of philosophy (Smith, 2018, sec. 1). There is no doubt that
the category of phenomenology should be included in the
classiﬁcatory framework for questions about consciousness.
Thus,
we
have
ﬁve
fundamental
categories
in
which
questions
about
consciousness
are
classiﬁed:
Deﬁnitional,
Phenomenological, Epistemological, Ontological, and Axiological1.
Each
fundamental
category
(except
the
deﬁnitional)
has
subcategories. The subcategories are set out partially in a
bottom–up manner: it is partially based on the widely accepted
division in the subject matter. In the rest of this section, I present
the ﬁve fundamental questions about consciousness and how
they are divided into subquestions (Figure 1).
1Note that I do not claim that the questions belonging to distinct fundamental
categories are independent of each other. Rather, they are interrelated in such a
way that the answer to one question aﬀects the scope of possible answers to other
kinds of questions.
FIGURE 1 | The list of questions about consciousness.
Deﬁnitional Question
How should we deﬁne the term “consciousness” and its cognates?
The deﬁnitional question is not divided into subquestions... .
Phenomenological Question
What phenomenological features does consciousness have?
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
The
phenomenological
question
is
divided
into
three
subquestions, depending on what aspect of consciousness to
focus on, namely, content, dimension, or structure. The content of
consciousness is understood as variable features of consciousness,
such as experienced color, shape, movement, taste, or feel2. The
dimension of consciousness is understood as the fundamentally
diﬀerent kinds of conscious experiences, such as perceptual,
cognitive, and emotional dimensions (Kriegel, 2015). The
structure of consciousness is understood as invariable features
of consciousness, such as unity and ﬁgure-ground structure
(Bayne, 2010; Watzl, 2011; Macpherson, 2015). While the general
structures of consciousness itself are typically discussed in the
philosophy of consciousness, the speciﬁc structures of each
dimension of consciousness can also be investigated.
Content Question
What content does consciousness have?
Dimension Question
What dimensions does consciousness have?
Structure Question
What structures does consciousness have?
Epistemological Question
How do we know about consciousness?
The epistemological question is divided into two subquestions,
depending on whose consciousness to address, whether one’s own
consciousness or the consciousness of others.
Epistemological Question About One’s Own
Consciousness
How do we know about our own consciousness?
Epistemological Question About Others’
Consciousness
How do we know about the consciousness of others?
Ontological Question
How is consciousness located in the world?
The ontological question is divided into two subquestions3.
The ﬁrst concerns the relation between consciousness and
the physical world; the second concerns the distribution of
consciousness over the physical world.
Mind–Body Question
What relation holds between consciousness and the physical
world (in particular our brain)?
2For the overview of philosophical issues about the content of consciousness, see
Macpherson (2011) and Siegel (2016).
3One might wonder why I do not formulate the ontological question as “what
is consciousness?” The reason is that it is ambiguous in that it can also be
interpreted as the deﬁnitional question and as the phenomenological question
asking the essential phenomenological features of consciousness. This ambiguity
of the question of “what is consciousness?” may cause confusions in consciousness
studies.
Distribution Question
How is consciousness distributed in the physical world? (In other
words, what has consciousness?)
Axiological Question
What values does consciousness have?
This question is divided into four subquestions, depending on
what kind of value to address, namely, cognitive, epistemic, moral,
or aesthetic4.
Cognitive Value Question
What type of cognitive capacity does consciousness enable its
possessor to have?
Epistemic Value Question
What type of knowledge does consciousness enable its possessor
to have?
Moral Value Question
What type of moral status does consciousness enable its possessor
to have?
Aesthetic Value Question
What type of aesthetic value does consciousness enable its
possessor to have?
THE LIST OF APPROACHES
In this section, I present approaches to each kind of questions
that have been actually employed by consciousness researchers
with a brief assessment of them (Figure 2). Note that although
each approach can be taken individually to address one question,
we can also take diﬀerent approaches in combination to
address one speciﬁc question. In this sense, these approaches
are not exclusive.
Approaches to the Deﬁnitional Question
Let us start with the deﬁnitional question: How should we
deﬁne the term “consciousness” and its cognates? There are
two approaches to the deﬁnitional question: (I) example-based
approach and (II) essence-based approach.
The
example-based
approach
deﬁnes
the
term
“consciousness” as something that is shared by typical examples of
conscious states/experiences, such as pain experience and visual
experience (Velmans, 2009; Nida-Rümelin, 2016; Prinz, 2016;
Schwitzgebel, 2016). This approach can provide a theoretically
neutral deﬁnition of consciousness, since it does not refer to any
distinctive property in the deﬁnition of the term “consciousness.”
The problem of the example-based approach is that it is unclear
how we should determine the scope of typical examples of
conscious experiences. If we restrict the “typical” examples
4Although I owe this division partly to Kriegel (2019), there are two diﬀerences.
First, I do not introduce the distinction between intrinsic and instrumental values
for the sake of simplicity. Second, I add cognitive value because (1) it does not
seem to be reducible to other kinds of value and (2) the cognitive value question
has actually been discussed in scientiﬁc consciousness studies (Kanai et al., 2019).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
FIGURE 2 | The list of questions about consciousness and each approach to them.
of conscious experiences too narrowly, borderline cases of
consciousness, such as dreamless sleep and vegetative states, may
be automatically excluded from consciousness studies. However,
it is controversial whether dreamless sleep and vegetative states
are conscious states (Shea and Bayne, 2010; Windt et al., 2016).
The essence-based approach deﬁnes the term “consciousness”
by referring to its essential property such as phenomenality
(or “what-it-is-like-ness”) (Chalmers, 1997), the property of
being inner, qualitative, and subjective (Searle, 2000), and being
accurately reportable (Baars, 1993, p. 19). The merit of this
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
approach is that it can provide an informative deﬁnition of
the term “consciousness.” Its problem is that it is highly
controversial what property we should count as the deﬁnitional
property of consciousness; there may be no single property
that all the consciousness researchers accept to be essential for
consciousness. Thus, the essence-based approach may cause a
dispute over the correct deﬁnition of consciousness. This dispute
can be resolved if we take a pluralist position about the deﬁnition
of consciousness, allowing that there are several diﬀerent
notions of consciousness deﬁned in diﬀerent manners, such as
“phenomenal consciousness” and “access consciousness” (Block,
1995). However, meta-level questions arise for the pluralists: what
relation holds between those notions of consciousness? Are they
diﬀerent aspects of a single phenomenon, or do they refer to
diﬀerent phenomena?
Approaches to the Phenomenological
Question
The second question is the phenomenological question: What
phenomenological features does consciousness have? This
question is divided into three subquestions: content, dimension,
and structure. There are three approaches to each subquestion:
(I) introspection approach, (II) observation approach, and (III)
reasoning approach.
The introspection approach explores the phenomenological
features of conscious experiences by introspection in a broad
sense, where it involves not only the cognitive activities of
“turning one’s attention inward and attending to one’s own
concurrent internal goings-on” but also uses of memory,
imagination, and concept application (Kriegel, 2015, pp. 20, 21).
Thus, introspection in this sense can include imagining
a
conscious
experience
and
conceptually
describing
its
phenomenological feature; it can also involve imaginatively
comparing a current conscious experience with past conscious
experiences5.
The
introspection
approach
works
for
basic
contents
of conscious experiences and their salient dimensions and
structures. For instance, when I introspect on my current
conscious experience of drinking Springbank 15 years, I
can ﬁnd that it has sweetness, smokiness, saltiness, and its
distinctive sulfur smell as its ﬂavor contents, that it has temporal
continuity as its structure, and that it has perceptual and
algedonic dimensions. However, there are cases for which
the introspection approach does not work. For instance,
sophisticated skills of introspection are required to capture the
complex phenomenological features of consciousness such as
dynamical interactions of attentional shifts and ﬂavor proﬁles
of drinking Springbank 15 years, but people typically lack such
skills. Furthermore, introspection seems unable to determine
whether a perceptual experience can have causal relations (e.g.,
touching a screen causing the screen ﬂashing) and natural
kind properties (e.g., being water) as its content (Siegel, 2007)
and whether consciousness has cognitive phenomenology as a
distinct dimension (Spener, 2011). This is not because our skills
5Husserlian Phenomenology can be counted as introspective on this broad
deﬁnition of introspection (Breyer and Gutland, 2016, p. 13; Gutland, 2018).
of introspection are not sophisticated to the required extent, but
because it is unclear how introspective data are related to these
issues. We need to clarify what introspective data are predicted
if we consciously experience causal relations between events in
addition to experiencing sequential occurrences of events, if we
consciously experience the property of being water in addition
to experiencing the presence of clear, colorless liquid, and if
consciousness has a cognitive dimension as being irreducible
to other dimensions such as sensory and imaginative ones.
Introspection turns out useless if no introspectable diﬀerence is
predicted there. A more fundamental limitation of introspection
is that one’s introspection is not eﬀective to understand the
phenomenological features of conscious experiences that one
is unable to have. For instance, it is hard for normal people to
understand by introspection the phenomenological features of
schizophrenic experiences and synesthetic experiences.
The observation approach is to infer what phenomenological
features a conscious experience has from its possessor’s
observable states/behaviors, including their subjective reports.
For instance, when one reports that she sees a red patch,
then we can infer that her conscious experience has red-color
content; when one groans painfully, we can infer that she
has pain experience6. This approach is available to explore
the
phenomenological
features
of
conscious
experiences
that are diﬃcult for researchers to have by themselves,
such as schizophrenic and synesthetic experiences. We can,
in
principle,
infer
what
phenomenological
features
such
conscious experiences have from their possessors’ observable
states/behaviors,
in
particular,
their
introspective
reports
(Hubbard and Ramachandran, 2003; Fuchs, 2007; Simmonds-
Moore, 2016). Experimental neuroscience of consciousness
typically employs the observation approach in investigating
neural properties responsible for the phenomenological features
of conscious experiences (Tononi and Koch, 2015, sec. 3).
This is in part because it needs to collect quantitative data
about neural activities from many experimental participants
rather than the researchers themselves alone. The practical
problem with this approach lies in how to interpret the
observable states/behaviors. In addressing untypical conscious
experiences, even the introspective reports of such experiences
are diﬃcult to interpret. Here is a report from a patient with
depersonalization syndrome: “I feel as though I’m not alive
as though my body is an empty, lifeless shell. I seem to be
standing apart from the rest of the world, as though I’m not
really here” (Bockner, 1949, p. 969). It is hard to understand
what the patient’s experience is like. Furthermore, Michel (2019)
points to the crucial role of background beliefs in interpreting
observable states/behaviors, claiming that the disagreements
among consciousness scientists mainly lie in whether to interpret
certain observable states/behaviors as evidence for the presence
of a phenomenological feature.
The
reasoning
approach
infers
what
phenomenological
features
consciousness
has
from
a
given
thesis
about
6It is controversial whether some kind of inference is always required to know
what others consciously experience. This paper sets aside this issue for simplicity.
See McDowell (1983) for an argument against the necessity of inference.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
consciousness. For instance, Pitt (2004) argues that given
that the possession of consciousness enables us to introspectively
know what we think, consciousness must have a cognitive
dimension as being irreducible to other dimensions7. A challenge
to those who adopt this approach is to justify a thesis about
consciousness used as a premise for reasoning. Note that the
premise in Pitt’s reasoning can be counted as an answer to
the epistemic value question: What type of knowledge does
consciousness enable its possessor to have? As shown in this,
answers to other kinds of questions, in particular, the ontological
question and the axiological question, can possibly be the premises
used in the reasoning approach.
Approaches to the Epistemological
Questions
The third question is the epistemological question: How do
we know about consciousness? This question is divided into
two subquestions depending on whose consciousness to address,
namely, one’s own consciousness or the consciousness of others.
There are three approaches to the epistemological question:
(I) ﬁrst-person descriptive approach, (II) third-person descriptive
approach, and (III) betterment approach.
The ﬁrst-person descriptive approach describes how we know
about our own consciousness and the consciousness of others
from the ﬁrst-person perspective. To describe how one knows
about one’s own consciousness from the ﬁrst-person perspective
is to describe ﬁrst-personally the processes of introspection.
This approach is employed in constructing/assessing theories
of introspection. For example, some philosophers reﬂect on
the process of introspection on perceptual experience and
describe it as being “transparent” in that we know the
contents of our own perceptual experience through being
aware of the external objects/events (Harman, 1990; Tye,
2000). A theory of introspection is constructed/assessed partially
based on the transparency of perceptual experience. If a
theory of introspection implies that introspection is entirely
distinct from perceptual awareness, the theory seems to
conﬂict with the transparency of perceptual experience and
therefore be assessed negatively. Likewise, to describe how
one knows about the consciousness of others from the ﬁrst-
person perspective is to describe ﬁrst-personally the processes of
knowing others’ conscious experiences. Some philosophical and
phenomenological accounts of how to know others’ conscious
experiences are partially based on the ﬁrst-personal descriptions
of such processes (Wittgenstein, 1980, sec. 570; Scheler, 2008;
Overgaard, 2017).
The third-person descriptive approach describes how we
know about our own consciousness and the consciousness
of others from the third-person perspective. To describe
how one knows about one’s own consciousness from the
third-personal perspective is to describe third-personally the
processes of introspection. This approach typically focuses on
the neural/psychological processes responsible for introspection
(Fleming et al., 2010; Baird et al., 2013; Jacobs and Silvanto, 2015),
where introspection is not diﬀerentiated from metacognition
7This is not the original form of Pitt’s argument but its possible reformulation.
[for
the
conceptual
relation
between
introspection
and
metacognition, see Overgaard and Sandberg (2012, sec. 1)].
A theory of introspection can also be evaluated based on the
relevant scientiﬁc ﬁndings. Likewise, to describe how one knows
about the consciousness of others from the third-personal
perspective is to describe third-personally the processes of
knowing others’ conscious experiences. This approach includes
attempts to describe the processes of mind reading and empathy.
Some focus on the relevant neural/psychological processes
(Marsh, 2018), others address external conditions in which
we try to know others’ conscious experiences (Gallagher and
Hutto, 2008). A theory of mind reading/empathy can be
constructed/assessed based on the data acquired through this
type of exploration.
The betterment approach explores how we can better know
about consciousness, rather than just describing how we know
about it. There are a few research projects that can be counted
as the betterment approach. Some training programs to enhance
the skills of empathy have been developed (Lam et al., 2011;
Englander, 2014). Likewise, there is a research project to design
a training program to enhance the skills of introspection in
general (Miyahara et al., 2020). There are also many attempts
to invent an interview-based method to know better what
others consciously experience (Petitmengin, 2006; Langdridge,
2007; Giorgi, 2009; Petitmengin et al., 2019). Moreover, brain-
decoding techniques may be available to know better about the
consciousness of others, including behaviorally non-responsive
patients’ experiences (Naci et al., 2017). Importantly, we can see
the betterment approach as developing methods to address the
phenomenological question8.
Approaches to the Ontological Question
The fourth question is the ontological question: How is
consciousness located in the world? This question is divided into
two subquestions. The ﬁrst is the mind–body question: What
relation holds between consciousness and the physical world (in
particular our brain?) The second is the distribution question:
How is consciousness distributed in the physical world? (In other
words, what has consciousness?) There are two approaches to the
mind–body question: (I) correlation approach and (II) reasoning
approach. There are also two approaches to the distribution
question: (I) intuition approach and (II) reasoning approach.
The
correlation
approach
explores
what
neural
or
informational feature is correlated with the presence of a
phenomenological feature of consciousness (or the presence
of consciousness itself) by using brain scanning technologies
such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and
brain stimulation techniques such as repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation (rTMS). Simply put, this is to explore
“neural correlates of consciousness (NCC),” which are the
minimal neuronal mechanisms jointly suﬃcient for a speciﬁc
8One might wonder why the question of “how it is possible for us to know about
consciousness,” which has been much discus-sed in philosophy, is not included in
the list of subcategories of the epistemological question. The reason is that the “how
possible” question should be interpreted as a form of the ontological question,
namely: what relation must hold between consciousness and the world (including
our body and brain) given that it is possible for us to know about consciousness?
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
content, dimension, or structure of consciousness (or the
presence of consciousness itself) (Crick and Koch, 1990).
There are many ﬁndings of the neural and informational
correlates of consciousness (Koch et al., 2016; Boly et al.,
2017; Wu, 2018, secs 4, 5). For example, some found that the
conscious experience of a visual scene is correlated with the
activities of the parahippocampal place area of our brain (a
subregion of the parahippocampal cortex that lies medially
in the inferior temporo-occipital cortex) (Mégevand et al.,
2014); others found that the conscious experience of a human
face is correlated with the activities of the posterior and mid
fusiform gyrus (Parvizi et al., 2012). The limitation of the
correlation approach is that it cannot, in principle, reveal a
more substantial relationship between consciousness and the
physical world than the correlation relation. Since the correlation
relation is consistent with many metaphysical relations such as
causal relation, grounding relation, and identity relation, the
correlation approach cannot determine which metaphysical
relation holds between consciousness and the physical world
(Kozuch and Kriegel, 2015).
The reasoning approach infers what relation holds between
consciousness and the physical world from a given thesis about
consciousness. For example, Papineau (2002, pp. 31–35) takes the
causal eﬃcacy thesis that consciousness can cause physical eﬀects
as a key premise for reasoning and argues that consciousness
is identical to physical properties. Chalmers (2010, pp. 106–
108) takes the conceivability of a phenomenal zombie—the
thesis that it is conceivable that a physical duplicate of us
lacks consciousness—as a key premise for reasoning and argues
that consciousness cannot be physical. Campbell (2002, chap.
6) argues that perceptual consciousness must be constituted
by ordinary mind-independent objects on the premise that
perceptual consciousness enables its possessor to know about
such ordinary mind-independent objects demonstratively. As
shown in these examples, the reasoning approach can address
what metaphysical relation holds between consciousness and the
physical world beyond mere correlation. As we saw in section
“Approaches to the Phenomenological Question”, however, a
challenge to those who adopt this approach is to justify the
thesis about consciousness used as a key premise for reasoning.
To address this, for example, one may try to justify the causal
eﬃcacy thesis by appealing to our folk psychological briefs,
such as the one that “my conscious thirst caused me to fetch
a beer” (Papineau, 2002, p. 21); another may try to justify the
conceivability of a phenomenal zombie by providing an argument
against the a priori entailment from physical facts to phenomenal
facts. The essential diﬃculty with the reasoning approach is
to settle the conﬂicts between those who take distinct theses,
which are justiﬁed in diﬀerent manners, as the premises to
infer opposing ontological positions (such as physicalism and
anti-physicalism).
The intuition approach to the distribution question asks
our intuition what has consciousness. We typically have some
intuitive thoughts about what can have consciousness. For
instance, it seems doubtless to me that other human beings are
conscious. Many other kinds of mammals, such as dogs and cats,
seem to have consciousness. However, microphysical entities and
machines like my laptop do not seem to have consciousness. It is
unclear to me whether insects and plants are conscious. On the
assumption that intuition is a reliable epistemic route to know
about the distribution of consciousness over the world, we can
employ our intuition to answer the distribution question. The
obvious problem with this approach is to justify the assumption
that intuition is reliable with respect to the distribution of
consciousness over the world.
The reasoning approach is also available to address the
distribution question: to infer what has consciousness from
a given thesis about consciousness. For example, if we
take biological naturalism that consciousness is a biological
phenomenon (Searle, 1992) as a premise for reasoning, we can
infer that non-biological entities, such as machines and robots,
cannot have consciousness. If we take IIT that consciousness
is identical to internally generated and integrated information
(Tononi, 2008) as a premise for reasoning, we can conclude that
any system that generates information in an integrated manner
has consciousness (for the detail of IIT, see section “Applications:
Integrated Information Theory and Global Workspace Theory”).
As we have seen, the essential diﬃculty with this approach is to
settle the debates between those who take distinct theses, which
are justiﬁed in diﬀerent manners, as the premises for reasoning.
Note that the answer to the distribution question directly
aﬀects the scope of the phenomenological and epistemological
questions. For instance, since IIT implies that computers
which generate information in an integrated manner possess
consciousness, the question of how we can know about the
consciousness of such computers arises for advocates of IIT.
Likewise, IIT opens up the phenomenological question about
such computers: What content, dimension, and structure does
their consciousness have?
Approaches to the Axiological Question
The ﬁfth question is the axiological question: What values
does consciousness have? This question is divided into four
subquestions depending on what kind of value to address:
cognitive, epistemic, moral, and esthetic. The scope of those
subquestions is not restricted to the values of consciousness itself
but includes those of each content, dimension, and structure
of consciousness. There are three approaches to the axiological
question: (I) ﬁrst-person contrast approach, (II) third-person
contrast approach, and (III) reasoning approach.
The ﬁrst-person contrast approach explores what diﬀerence
there is in relevant value between the cases where one has
and lacks consciousness (or where one’s consciousness has and
lacks a speciﬁc phenomenological feature) from the ﬁrst-person
perspective. This approach typically consists of the following two
steps: (a) to ﬁrst-personally imagine that one loses consciousness
(or a speciﬁc phenomenological feature disappears from one’s
consciousness) and (b) to consider what value-related feature
she thereby loses. Siewert (1998, 2014) takes this approach,
arguing that (1) consciousness makes the life of its possessor
worth living and that (2) only the possessor of consciousness
can perform intentional cognitive activities/processes such as
making judgments and having desires. The ﬁrst point concerns
moral value and possibly aesthetic value; the second point
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
7
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
concerns cognitive value. Campbell (2002, chap. 1) also takes
this approach, arguing that perceptual experience enables its
possessor to know about ordinary mind-independent objects
demonstratively. The problem with this approach is that it
is controversial whether our ﬁrst-personal thoughts about the
values of consciousness are reliable. When reﬂecting on how
we visually discriminate an object from others, for example, we
are likely to think that if we lose perceptual consciousness, we
cannot carry out the discrimination task. However, this intuitive
thought seems to be falsiﬁed by the case of blindsight: the patient
can achieve various visual discrimination tasks by “guesswork,”
even though he said he did not have any visual experience
(Weiskrantz, 2007).
The third-person contrast approach explores what diﬀerence
there is in relevant value between the cases where one has
and lacks consciousness (or where one’s consciousness has
and lacks a speciﬁc phenomenological feature) from the third-
person perspective. Dehaene and Naccache (2001) take this
approach, arguing that consciousness enables durable and explicit
information maintenance, novel combinations of operations, and
intentional behavior. Weiskrantz (1997, chap. 7) focuses on a
broad spectrum of syndromes in which there seems to be a
loss of capacities related to consciousness, such as blindsight
and aphasic disorders, arguing that consciousness grounds the
capacities to perform ﬂexible thinking and imagining. Kriegel
(2017) compares our natural attitudes to conscious beings and
non-conscious beings, and argues that consciousness confers
dignity as a moral status on its possessors (possibly with some
other conditions). However, it may be objected that the apparent
diﬀerences in values can be explained without appealing to
consciousness (Lau, 2009; see also Rosenthal, 2008). Hence,
a challenge to the third-person contrast approach is to argue
that the proposed diﬀerence in a type of value cannot be well
explained without referring to consciousness.
The reasoning approach infers what values consciousness
has from a given thesis about consciousness. For example, Tye
(1996) takes the representationalist thesis that consciousness is
representational as the key premise for reasoning and concludes
that consciousness enables its possessor “to do a wide variety
of things that they would not be able to do without it—for
example, to recognize objects, to avoid knocking into them” (pp.
301, 302). The proponents of the attentional schema thesis that
consciousness is an internal model of attention (Graziano and
Webb, 2014) can take it as a premise for reasoning and conclude
that consciousness enables its possessor to control attention
in proper manners.
APPLICATIONS: INTEGRATED
INFORMATION THEORY AND GLOBAL
WORKSPACE THEORY
This article proposes a map of consciousness studies, which
consists of a systematic list of questions about consciousness
and existing approaches to each question. In this ﬁnal section,
I apply this map to examine IIT and GWT. I ﬁrst address
how IIT answers each fundamental question that I have listed.
In doing so, I point out several challenges to IIT. I then
take the same procedure to examine GWT. I ﬁnally propose
a way to clarify the relation between IIT and GWT with
the help of the proposed map of consciousness studies. The
discussion is sketchy but still suﬃcient to demonstrate how the
proposed map can be used to examine and compare theories
of consciousness.
Let us start with the deﬁnitional question. Tononi (2015,
abstract, emphasis added) claims that IIT “attempts to identify
the essential properties of consciousness (axioms) and, from
there, infers the properties of physical systems that can
account for it (postulates).” He lists ﬁve essential properties
of consciousness, namely, intrinsic existence, composition,
information, integration, and exclusion, and calls them “axioms”
(Tononi, 2015, sec. 2). The intrinsic existence axiom states
that consciousness exists independently from external observers,
the composition axiom states that consciousness is structured,
the information axiom states that each conscious experience
is the particular way it is and thereby it diﬀers from other
possible conscious experiences, the integration axiom states
that consciousness is uniﬁed, and the exclusion axiom states
that consciousness is deﬁnite in content and spatiotemporal
grain9. The fact that they are called “axioms” suggests that the
conjunction of the listed essential properties ﬁxes the reference of
“consciousness.” Thus, IIT takes the essence-based approach to
the deﬁnitional question, claiming that consciousness is deﬁned
in terms of the ﬁve axioms.
One slogan of IIT is that it goes “from phenomenology to
physics” (Tononi et al., 2016, p. 450); the axioms are called
the “phenomenological axioms” (Oizumi et al., 2014). This
indicates that the axioms are derived from phenomenological
considerations, namely, by addressing the phenomenological
question, in particular, the structure question of what invariant
features consciousness has (since the essential properties of
consciousness are the invariant of consciousness). This suggests
that advocates of IIT answer the deﬁnitional question through
tackling the structure question.
Advocates of IIT claim that the phenomenological axioms
“cannot be doubted and do not need proof” and are “taken
to be immediately evident” (Oizumi et al., 2014, p. 2).
This shows that they take the introspection approach to the
structure question, rather than the observation approach and
the reasoning approach, to derive the phenomenological axioms.
However, some philosophers cast doubt on the plausibility
of the axioms as capturing the essential phenomenological
features of consciousness (Bayne, 2018; Pokropski, 2018;
Miyahara and Witkowski, 2019). This demonstrates that the
phenomenological axioms can be doubted and should not
be taken to be immediately evident. Thus, advocates of IIT
must justify the phenomenological axioms, employing the other
approaches if needed.
Let us next move onto the ontological question. IIT
speciﬁes ﬁve informational features of physical systems (so-
called “postulates”), each of which is supposed to account
9For more details of axioms in IIT, see Oizumi et al. (2014); Tononi et al. (2016),
and Miyahara and Witkowski (2019).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
8
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
for a corresponding phenomenological axiom, and states that
every physical system that realizes the ﬁve postulates possesses
consciousness10. This statement is counted as the answer to the
distribution question. Nevertheless, it is not fully clear what
reasoning is in play here (especially in what sense each postulate
“accounts for” a corresponding phenomenological axiom and
why each postulate necessitates the phenomenological feature
represented by the corresponding axiom). In order to evaluate
IIT’s answer to the distribution question, thus, we should clarify
the exact premises and inferential steps that constitute the
reasoning in question.
IIT answers the mind–body question by stating that conscious
experience is identical to an integrated informational structure
of physical systems that instantiates the ﬁve postulates (Tononi,
2015, sec. 4). There is, however, no mention of how the identity
claim is derived in any IIT literature. As we have seen in
section “Approaches to the Ontological Question”, identity is
not reasonably inferred only from the presence of correlation,
since other metaphysical relations such as causal relation and
grounding relation are also compatible with the presence of
correlation. To justify the identity claim, advocates of IIT need
to clarify what theses they use as the premises for the reasoning
in question, in addition to the experimental ﬁnding that there is a
correlation between the presence of consciousness and a relevant
informational structure of brains (Massimini et al., 2005).
Otherwise, we cannot properly evaluate IIT’s identity claim.
Let us ﬁnally examine what implications IIT have for the
epistemological and the axiological questions. First, IIT seems
to have an implication for the epistemological question about
the consciousness of others. IIT states that the phenomenological
features of consciousness (in particular contents and dimensions)
are reﬂected in the form of the informational structure of physical
systems (Tononi, 2015, sec. 4; Tononi et al., 2016, p. 459). It
follows from this that we can infer the phenomenological features
of the consciousness of others from the form of the informational
structure of their brain, which we can, in principle, specify
from the third-person perspective. This can be counted as an
answer to the epistemological question about the consciousness
of others. IIT also has an implication for the cognitive value
question. If it is cognitively advantageous for physical systems to
generate information in an integrated manner, IIT implies that
the possession of consciousness is cognitively advantageous for
that very reason.
I turn to how GWT (in particular its major advocate Stanislas
Dehaene) answers each fundamental question listed in The
List of Questions section. Dehaene (2014, pp. 8, 9) deﬁnes
consciousness in terms of “conscious access”: the content of
mental state/process is consciously accessible if and only if
it enters awareness and becomes reportable to others. This
deﬁnition consists of two notions, awareness and reportability.
The property of being reportable serves to provide an informative
deﬁnition of consciousness, since we can set out an objective
procedure to determine whether a piece of information is
reportable for its possessor. In contrast, it is unclear how
“awareness” is diﬀerent from “consciousness” in our ordinary
conceptual understandings. Furthermore, it is unclear what
10For the details of the postulates, see Oizumi et al. (2014).
behavioral standard can be used to determine whether one is
aware of a piece of information, as being diﬀerent from the one
for reportability. Nevertheless, Dehaene does not seem to provide
an analytic explanation of the notion of awareness. Instead, he
presents a few examples of being aware of something. For instance,
he presents an example of visual illusion and states:
Twelve dots, printed in light gray, surround a black cross. Now stare
intently at the central cross. After a few seconds, you should see some
of the gray dots fade in and out of existence. For a few seconds, they
vanish from your awareness; then they pop back in. Sometimes the
entire set goes away, temporarily leaving you with a blank page—
only to return a few seconds later with a seemingly darker shade of
gray. (Dehaene, 2014, p. 17)
This suggests that Dehaene leads his readers to grasp the sense
of “awareness” through the examples presented in his book. If
this is correct, his deﬁnition of consciousness is not entirely
operational, for it does not reduce the sense of “consciousness”
to reportability alone. In deﬁning consciousness, Dehaene seems
to take the example-based and essence-based approaches in
combination; the former corresponds to the “awareness” part,
and the latter corresponds to the “reportability” part.
Dehaene (2014, chap. 4) takes the correlation approach to
the mind–body question, presenting many relevant empirical
ﬁndings11. Based on them, he identiﬁes four physiological
markers that index whether a stimulus is consciously accessible:
First, a conscious stimulus causes an intense neuronal activation
that leads to a sudden ignition of parietal and prefrontal circuits.
Second, in the EEG, conscious access is accompanied by a slow
wave called the P3 wave, which emerges as late as one-third of a
second after the stimulus. Third, conscious ignition also triggers a
late and sudden burst of high-frequency oscillations. Finally, many
regions exchange bidirectional and synchronized messages over long
distances in the cortex, thus forming a global brain web. (Dehaene,
2014, pp. 158, 159)
Dehaene then provides a functionalist account as to why
consciousness is correlated with those physiological makers.
The human brain has developed eﬃcient long-distance networks,
particularly in the prefrontal cortex, to select relevant information
and disseminate it throughout the brain. Consciousness is an
evolved device that allows us to attend to a piece of information and
keep it active within this broadcasting system. Once the information
is conscious, it can be ﬂexibly routed to other areas according to our
current goals. Thus we can name it, evaluate it, memorize it, or use
it to plan the future (Dehaene, 2014, p. 161).
This
functionalist
account
describes
how
a
piece
of
information is cognitively processed in our brain when it is
consciously accessible and thereby explains why the above
physiological makers occur in functional terms. This account
is thus an empirically supported correlation-based answer
to the mind–body question. This is, I think, the core thesis
of GWT. However, Dehaene (2014, p. 161) goes beyond the
11It is necessary to address the content question before exploring the correlation
between the contents of consciousness and neural/informational features of brains.
Dehaene (2014, p. 41–45) takes the observation approach to address the content
question, emphasizing the availability of subjective reports from experimental
participants as objective data.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
9
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
empirically supported claim regarding correlation, claiming
that “consciousness is brain-wide information sharing.” If we
interpreted this statement literally, it would mean the identity
between consciousness and the brain-wide information sharing.
However, this identity claim does not directly follow from the
empirically supported claim about correlation. If Dehaene (2014)
deﬁned consciousness only in terms of reportability, then the
identity claim would be derived from the fact that reportability
can be reductively explained in terms of brain-wide information
sharing. However, Dehaene (2014) includes “awareness” in his
deﬁnition of consciousness, which is supposed to be grasped
through examples. It is unclear whether the property of being
aware of something is considered to be reductively explained in
functional terms, unlike reportability. Thus, Dehaene is required
to explain why the property of being aware of something should
be counted as standing in the identity relation, rather than other
metaphysical relations, to the brain-wide information sharing.
As in the case of IIT, we cannot properly evaluate IIT’s identity
claim unless some explanation is provided.
Global workspace theory has implications for (i) the cognitive
value question, (ii) the epistemological question about the
consciousness of others, and (iii) the distribution question. Given
that a piece of information can be ﬂexibly routed to many brain
areas only when it is consciously accessible, it is plausible to think
that (i) consciousness enables its possessor to process information
in such ﬂexible manners (Dehaene, 2014, chap. 3) and that (ii)
we can know about the content of the consciousness of others
by detecting the information widely shared in his/her brain. (iii)
It follows from GWT’s identity claim that every creature who
has “brain-wide information sharing” is conscious (Dehaene,
2014, chap. 6.7).
We can clarify the relation between IIT and GWT by
comparing their answers to each fundamental question. Let us
take three questions, for example, the deﬁnitional question, the
mind–body question, and the distribution question. For the
deﬁnitional question, IIT states that consciousness is deﬁned
in terms of the ﬁve phenomenological axioms, which are
supposed to capture the essential properties of consciousness. In
contrast, GWT deﬁnes consciousness in terms of awareness and
reportability. By comparing the two deﬁnitions of consciousness,
we can examine whether IIT and GWT have the same research
subject in the ﬁrst place. For the mind–body question, IIT
states that conscious experience is identical to an integrated
informational structure of physical systems that instantiates the
ﬁve postulates. In contrast, GWT states that consciousness is
brain-wide information sharing. By comparing the two identity
claims, we can examine whether they are compatible or conﬂicting.
For the distribution question, IIT states that every physical
system that realizes the ﬁve postulates possesses consciousness.
In contrast, GWT implies that every creature who has brain-wide
information sharing has consciousness. By examining whether
each kind of creature overlaps, we can see whether IIT and
GWT substantially diﬀer in what existing creatures/entities have
consciousness. In this way, we can conduct a multidimensional
comparison between IIT and GWT. This enables us to assess
the two theories systematically and comparatively in the
multidimensional evaluative space.
I close this article by presenting three ideas on how to proceed
with consciousness research with the help of the lists of questions
and approaches proposed in this article. First, we should examine
how existing theories of consciousness answer each fundamental
question about consciousness and what approach their advocates
adopt. By doing so, we can obtain systematic understandings
of each theory of consciousness, which enable us to see what
part of each theory of consciousness needs to be justiﬁed
and developed. Second, we should conduct a multidimensional
comparison of the existing theories of consciousness. This
enables us to obtain a detailed and well-organized review of
how they are related to each other. These two points have been
demonstrated in the discussions of IIT and GWT. Third, each
research group should clarify what question and approach to
take in investigating consciousness. By doing so, they can be
aware of the scope, limitation, and potential implications of their
research project and also of its relations to existing theories
of consciousness.
Although I believe that the proposed lists of questions and
approaches contribute to the development of consciousness
studies, I do not think that they are entirely satisfactory. The
map of consciousness studies presented in this article can be
revised and further enriched. I hope that this article also works
as a springboard for a further second-order investigation on
consciousness studies as being distinct from the ﬁrst-order
investigation on consciousness.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included in
the article/supplementary material.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work and
has approved it for publication.
FUNDING
I gratefully acknowledge the support of the Japan Society
for
the
Promotion
of
Science
(JSPS
KAKENHI
Grant
Number: 18K00031).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Benedicte Veillet, Ying-Tung Lin, Katsunori
Miyahara, Matthieu Koroma, Lok-Chi Chan, and Uriah Kriegel
for their detailed comments on this article. I also thank the
audience at the 22nd conference of the Association for the
Scientiﬁc Study of Consciousness, the 10th Annual Meeting of
Japan Association for Contemporary and Applied Philosophy,
the consciousness workshop at National Yang-Ming University,
and Paris Consciousness/Self-consciousness Group for their
questions and comments. I appreciate Nanami Yamada for
designing the ﬁgures in this article.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
10
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
REFERENCES
Baars, B. J. (1993). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Reprint edition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baars, B. J. (2005). Global workspace theory of consciousness: toward a cognitive
neuroscience of human experience. Prog. Brain Res. 150, 45–53. doi: 10.1016/
S0079-6123(05)50004-9
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Gorgolewski, K. J., and Margulies, D. S. (2013). Medial
and lateral networks in anterior prefrontal cortex support metacognitive ability
for memory and perception. J. Neurosci. 33, 16657–16665. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0786-13.2013
Ball, P. (2019). Neuroscience Readies for a Showdown Over Consciousness Ideas.
New York, NY: Quanta Magazine.
Bayne, T. (2010). The Unity of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bayne, T. (2018). On the axiomatic foundations of the integrated information
theory of consciousness. Neurosci. Conscious. 4:niy007. doi: 10.1093/nc/niy007
Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behav. Brain
Sci. 18, 227–247. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X00038188
Bockner, S. (1949). The depersonalization syndrome: report of a case. J. Ment. Sci.
95, 968–971. doi: 10.1192/bjp.95.401.968
Boly, M., Massimini, M., Tsuchiya, N., Postle, B. R., Koch, C., and Tononi, G.
(2017). Are the neural correlates of consciousness in the front or in the back
of the cerebral cortex? Clinical and neuroimaging evidence. J. Neurosci. 37,
9603–9613. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3218-16.2017
Breyer, T., and Gutland, C. (2016). Phenomenology of Thinking: Philosophical
Investigations into the Character of Cognitive Experiences. London: Routledge.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.3218-16.2017
Campbell, J. (2002). Reference and Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. (1997). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory.
Revised ∧. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. (2010). The Character of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Chomsky, N. (2014). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Anniversary, Reprint ∧.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Crick, F., and Koch, C. (1990). Towards a neurobiological theory of consciousness.
Semin. Neurosci. 2, 263–275.
Dehaene, S. (2014). Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How the Brain Codes
Our Thoughts. New York, NY: Viking.
Dehaene, S., and Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive neuroscience of
consciousness: basic evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition 79, 1–37.
doi: 10.1016/S0010-0277(00)00123-2
Englander, M. (2014). Empathy training from a phenomenological perspective.
J. Phenomenol. Psychol. 45, 5–26. doi: 10.1163/15691624-12341266
Fleming, S. M., Weil, R. S., Nagy, Z., Dolan, R. J., and Rees, G. (2010). Relating
introspective accuracy to individual diﬀerences in brain structure. Science 329,
1541–1543. doi: 10.1126/science.1191883
Fuchs, T. (2007). The temporal structure of intentionality and its disturbance in
schizophrenia. PSP 40, 229–235. doi: 10.1159/000101365
Gallagher, S., and Hutto, D. D. (2008). “Understanding others through
primary interaction and narrative practice,” in The Shared Mind: Perspectives
on Intersubjectivity Converging Evidence in Language and Communication
Research (CELCR), eds T. P. Racine, J. Zlatev, C. Sinha and E. Itkonen
(Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company), 17–38. doi: 10.1075/celcr.
12.04gal
Giorgi, A. (2009). The Descriptive Phenomenological Method in Psychology: A
modIﬁed Husserlian Approach. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University Press.
Graziano,
M.
S.
A.,
and
Webb,
T.
W.
(2014).
A
mechanistic
theory
of consciousness. Int. J. Mach. Conscious. 06, 163–176. doi: 10.1142/
S1793843014400174
Gutland, C. (2018). Husserlian phenomenology as a kind of introspection. Front.
Psychol. 9:896. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00896
Harman, G. (1990). The intrinsic quality of experience. Philos. Perspect. 4, 31–52.
doi: 10.2307/2214186
Hubbard, E., and Ramachandran, V. (2003). The phenomenology of synaesthesia.
J. Conscious. Stud. 10, 49–57.
Jacobs, C., and Silvanto, J. (2015). How is working memory content consciously
experienced? The ‘conscious copy’ model of WM introspection. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 55, 510–519. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.06.003
Kanai, R., Chang, A., Yu, Y., Magrans, de Abril, I., Biehl, M., et al. (2019).
Information generation as a functional basis of consciousness. Neurosci.
Conscious. 2019:niz016. doi: 10.1093/nc/niz016
Koch, C., Massimini, M., Boly, M., and Tononi, G. (2016). Neural correlates of
consciousness: progress and problems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 307–321. doi:
10.1038/nrn.2016.22
Kozuch, B., and Kriegel, U. (2015). “Correlation, causation, constitution: on
the interplay between the science and philosophy of consciousness,” in The
Constitution of Phenomenal Consciousness, ed. S. M. Miller (Amsterdam: John
Benjamins), 400–417. doi: 10.1075/aicr.92.17koz
Kriegel, U. (2015). The Varieties of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, U. (2017). “Dignity and the phenomenology of recognition-respect,”
in
Emotional
Experiences:
Ethical
and
Social
Signiﬁcance,
eds
J.
J.
Drummond and S. Rinofner-Kreidl (New York, NY: Rowman & Littleﬁeld),
121–136.
Kriegel, U. (2019). The value of consciousness. Analysis 79, 503–520. doi: 10.1093/
analys/anz045
Lam, T. C. M., Kolomitro, K., and Alamparambil, F. C. (2011). Empathy training:
methods. Evaluation practices, and validity. J. MultiDiscipl. Eval. 7, 162–200.
Langdridge, D. (2007). Phenomenological Psychology: Theory, Research and
Method. Harlow: Pearson Education.
Lau, H. (2009). Volition and the function of consciousness. Faith Philos. 26,
537–552. doi: 10.5840/faithphil200926554
Lee, D. S. (1966). “Ultimacy and the philosophic ﬁeld of metaphysics,” in
Metaphysics and Belief Tulane Studies in Philosophy, ed. F. R. Merlan
(Dordrecht:
Springer
Netherlands),
71–102.
doi:
10.1007/978-94-010-
3540-8_5
Macpherson, F. (2011). “Introduction: the admissible contents of experience,” in
The Admissible Contents of Experience, eds K. Hawley and F. Macpherson
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd), 1–15. doi: 10.1002/9781444343915.ch1
Macpherson, F. (2015). the structure of experience, the nature of the visual, and
type 2 blindsight. Conscious. Cogn. 32, 104–128. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.
10.011
Marsh, A. A. (2018). The neuroscience of empathy. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 19,
110–115. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2017.12.016
Massimini, M., Ferrarelli, F., Huber, R., Esser, S. K., Singh, H., and Tononi, G.
(2005). Breakdown of cortical eﬀective connectivity during sleep. Science 309,
2228–2232. doi: 10.1126/science.1117256
McDowell, J. (1983). “Criteria, defeasibility, and knowledge,” in Proceedings of the
British Academy 68, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 455–479.
Mégevand, P., Groppe, D. M., Goldﬁnger, M. S., Hwang, S. T., Kingsley, P. B.,
Davidesco, I., et al. (2014). Seeing scenes: topographic visual hallucinations
evoked by direct electrical stimulation of the parahippocampal place area.
J. Neurosci. 34, 5399–5405. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5202-13.2014
Michel, M. (2019). Consciousness science underdetermined. Ergo Open Access J.
Philos. 6, 2019–2020. doi: 10.3998/ergo.12405314.0006.028
Miyahara, K., Niikawa, T., Hamada, H. T., and Nishida, S. (2020). Developing
a short-term phenomenological training program: a report of methodological
lessons. New Ideas Psychol. 58:100780. doi: 10.1016/j.newideapsych.2020.
100780
Miyahara, K., and Witkowski, O. (2019). The integrated structure of consciousness:
phenomenal content, subjective attitude, and noetic complex. Phenomenol.
Cogn. Sci. 18, 731–758. doi: 10.1007/s11097-018-9608-5
Naci, L., Sinai, L., and Owen, A. M. (2017). Detecting and interpreting conscious
experiences in behaviorally non-responsive patients. NeuroImage 145, 304–313.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.059
Nida-Rümelin, M. (2016). “The illusion of illusionism,” in Illusionism as a Theory
of Consciousness, ed. K. Frankish (England: Imprint Academic), 200–214.
Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., and Tononi, G. (2014). From the phenomenology to the
mechanisms of consciousness: integrated information theory 3.0. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 10:e1003588. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003588
Overgaard, M., and Sandberg, K. (2012). Kinds of access: diﬀerent methods for
report reveal diﬀerent kinds of metacognitive access. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.
B Biol. Sci. 367, 1287–1296. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2011.0425
Overgaard, S. (2017). Other minds embodied. Cont. Philos. Rev. 50, 65–80. doi:
10.1007/s11007-016-9388-y
Papineau, D. (2002). Thinking About Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
11
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152

Niikawa
A Map of Consciousness Studies
Parvizi, J., Jacques, C., Foster, B. L., Withoft, N., Rangarajan, V., Weiner, K. S., et al.
(2012). Electrical stimulation of human fusiform face-selective regions distorts
face perception. J. Neurosci. 32, 14915–14920. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2609-
12.2012
Petitmengin, C. (2006). Describing one’s subjective experience in the second
person: an interview method for the science of consciousness. Phenom. Cogn.
Sci. 5, 229–269. doi: 10.1007/s11097-006-9022-2
Petitmengin, C., Remillieux, A., and Valenzuela-Moguillansky, C. (2019).
Discovering the structures of lived experience. Phenomenol. Cogn. Sci. 18,
691–730. doi: 10.1007/s11097-018-9597-4
Pitt, D. (2004). The phenomenology of cognition or “What Is It like to Think
That P?”. Philos. Phenomenol. Res. 69, 1–36. doi: 10.1111/j.1933-1592.2004.
tb00382.x
Pokropski, M. (2018). Commentary: from the phenomenology to the mechanisms
of consciousness: integrated information theory 3.0. Front. Psychol. 9:101. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00101
Prinz, J. (2016). Against illusionism. J. Conscious. Stud. 23, 186–196.
Rosenthal, D. M. (2008). Consciousness and its function. Neuropsychologia 46,
829–840. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.11.012
Scheler, M. (2008). The Nature of Sympathy. Piscataway, NJ: AldineTransaction.
Schwitzgebel, E. (2016). ). Phenomenal consciousness, deﬁned and defended as
innocently as i can manage. J. Conscious. Stud. 23, 224–235.
Searle, J. R. (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books.
Searle, J. R. (2000). Consciousness. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 23, 557–578. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.neuro.23.1.557
Shea, N., and Bayne, T. (2010). The vegetative state and the science
of
consciousness.
Br.
J.
Philos.
Sci.
61,
459–484.
doi:
10.1093/bjps/
axp046
Siegel, S. (2007). How can we discover the contents of experience? Southern J.
Philos. 45, 127–142. doi: 10.1111/j.2041-6962.2007.tb00118.x
Siegel, S. (2016). “The contents of perception,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, ed. E. N. Zalta (Stanford, CA: Stanford University).
Siewert, C. (1998). The Signiﬁcance of Consciousness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Siewert, C. (2014). “Speaking up for consciousness,” in Current Controversies in
Philosophy of Mind, ed. U. Kriegel (London: Routledge), 199–221. doi: 10.4324/
9780203116623-9
Simmonds-Moore, C. A. (2016). An interpretative phenomenological analysis
exploring synesthesia as an exceptional experience: insights for consciousness
and cognition. Q. Res. Psychol. 13, 303–327. doi: 10.1080/14780887.2016.
1205693
Smith, D. W. (2018). “Phenomenology,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, ed. E. N. Zalta (Stanford, CA: Stanford University).
Speaks, J. (2019). “Theories of meaning,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, ed. E. N. Zalta (Stanford, CA: Stanford University).
Spener, M. (2011). “Disagreement about cognitive phenomenology,” in Cognitive
Phenomenology, eds T. Bayne and M. Montague (Oxford: Oxford University
Press), 268–284. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199579938.003.0012
Tononi, G. (2008). Consciousness as integrated information: a provisional
manifesto. Biol. Bull. 215, 216–242. doi: 10.2307/25470707
Tononi, G. (2015). Integrated information theory. Scholarpedia 10:4164. doi: 10.
4249/scholarpedia.4164
Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., and Koch, C. (2016). Integrated information
theory: from consciousness to its physical substrate. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17,
450–461. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.44
Tononi, G., and Koch, C. (2015). Consciousness: here, there and everywhere? Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. B 370:20140167. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2014.0167
Tye, M. (1996). The function of consciousness. Noûs 30, 287–305. doi: 10.2307/
2216271
Tye, M. (2000). Consciousness, Color, and Content. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Velmans, P. M. (2009). How to deﬁne consciousness—and how not to deﬁne
Consciousness. J. Conscious. Stud. 16, 139–156.
Watzl, S. (2011). “Attention as structuring of the stream of consciousness,” in
Attention: Philosophical and Psychological Essays, eds C. Mole, D. Smithies, and
W. Wu (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 145–173.
Weiskrantz, L. (1997). Consciousness Lost and Found: A Neuropsychological
Exploration. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Weiskrantz, L. (2007). Blindsight. Scholarpedia 2:3047. doi: 10.4249/scholarpedia.
3047
Windt, J. M., Nielsen, T., and Thompson, E. (2016). Does consciousness disappear
in dreamless sleep? Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 871–882. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2016.
09.006
Wittgenstein, L. (1980). Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Wole´nski, J. (2004). “The history of epistemology,” in Handbook of Epistemology,
eds I. Niiniluoto, M. Sintonen, and J. Wole´nski (Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands), 3–54. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-1986-9_1
Wu, W. (2018). “The neuroscience of consciousness,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, ed. E. N. Zalta (Stanford, CA: Stanford University).
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Niikawa. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
12
October 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 530152
