GOOD PRACTICES IN TEACHING COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE  
TO BIOLOGY STUDENTS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
Eleftheria Katsarou1, Angeliki Boulala2, Petros Karampet1,  
& Lefkothea-Vasiliki Andreou2  
1Independent author 
2Department of Biological Applications and Technology, University of Ioannina (Greece)  
Abstract 
Cognitive Neuroscience refers to the scientific study of the mind and the brain, mainly by means of 
neuroimaging techniques and psychophysics. This field is considered rather complex, often posing 
learning challenges for students, especially in terms of the terminology and technical jargon used, as well 
as due to its interdisciplinary, STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) nature. To 
address this issue, an active learning approach was implemented. The present report describes a repertoire 
of targeted educational activities, developed in the context of a Cognitive Neuroscience course at a 
Biology Department in Higher Education. To approach consciousness, the theatre analogy for the Global 
Workspace Theory, developed by Bernard Baars, was used. This refers to a parallelism between elements 
of a theatrical production and consciousness. To this end, students attended a theatre performance and 
subsequently physically engaged in a series of onstage exercises. Next, a Science Spring Picnic was held 
to foster an informal dialogue on newly established knowledge, in a relaxed environment over food, 
beverages and kite flying. Finally, outreach activities were organized in the form of an art & science 
communication exhibition on visual illusions, at a major Science festival. Student feedback, by means of 
anonymous questionnaires, clearly denoted that the activities promoted motivation for learning, learning, 
and engagement beyond the classroom.  
Keywords: Cognitive Neuroscience, good practices in education, higher education, active learning, 
science communication.  
1. Introduction
How is a mechanical or chemical signal transformed into higher cognitive functions? To unravel 
this enigma, the field of Cognitive Neuroscience studies the mind and the brain, via advanced 
neuroimaging techniques and psychophysics (Poeppel, Mangun, Gazzaniga, & Bassett, 2020; Vallet, van 
Wassenhove, 2023). This domain stands in the intersection of STEM: Science, Technology, Engineering 
and Mathematics (Basu, Mondoux, Whitt, Isaacs, & Narita, 2017). This fact, alongside niche terminology 
and methodology, present significant hurdles to students (Baars & Gage, 2010).  To tackle this issue, 
innovative teaching approaches may be implemented, namely active learning (Santosh, & Nakarmi, 
2023). Active learning is an experiential educational practice so to increase student engagement (Zepke 
& Leach, 2010). The aim is to mitigate the academic burden through participation in -outside the 
classroom- course activities. The purpose of this report is to present good educational practices, that took 
place in the context of a Cognitive Neuroscience University course, offered to Biology students.  
2. Methodology
2.1. The Theatre Analogy 
To treat consciousness as an observable variable (Baars, 2017), students participated in a 
theatrical workshop (Figure 1.a). For this purpose, Bernard Baars’ Theatre Analogy of the Global 
Workspace theory was used, i.e., a metaphorical framework that compares parts of a theatre and the 
conscious and unconscious contents that form the brain’s mental processes (Baars, 2017). According to 
this analogy, the theatre stage corresponds to the working memory, whilst the spotlight on the stage 
represents voluntary attention. The content of consciousness is limited to the materials on the stage; the 
rest of the theatre represents unconscious knowledge and processes. Students first attended a theatrical 
https://doi.org/10.36315/2024v1end062
Education and New Developments 2024
269

performance, and then found themselves on stage and under the spotlight. Through a series of physical 
theatre exercises, students worked on drawing several parallels to the concept of consciousness through a 
functional framework of human cognition. By forming emotional responses to external stimuli, they 
recreated the bottom-up attentional capture and they progressed to focus on top-down voluntary attention; 
ultimately, selectively directing their attention. 
 
2.2. Science spring picnic 
This extra credit course activity is a Journal Club with a twist, inspired by a previously published 
project, namely Science Tea Party (Andreou, Aletra, Athanasopoulou & Psarropoulou, 2018).  
A neuroscience curation of topics from the Nautilus Journal (http://nautil.us/) was made available to the 
students, so to choose their paper between the following options: 1. How Your Brain Fills in the Blanks 
with Experience; 2. Neuroscience has a Race Problem; 3. I Feel, Therefore I Am; 4. Why your Brain’s 
Sense of Time is so Elastic; 5. Unlocking Mom’s Brain; 6. Our Mind-Boggling Sense of Smell; 7. How 
We Remember Last Weekend; 8. The Brain Uses Calculus to Control Fast Movements; 9. Get Lost in 
Parking Lots -You Might Have Developmental Topographic Disorientation; 10. Are We Wired to Be 
Outside?. For presentation guidelines see Andreou et al. (2018). Students gave 5-minute talks, over food, 
beverages and kite flying, followed by plenary discussion (Figure 1.b). They were instructed to drill down 
to the most fundamental aspects of the publication and to interact with the audience. The premise of the 
activity was to boost science communication skills, outdoors, in a lax atmosphere. This way, a safe 
learning space was established, that nurtured informal conversations, on neuroscience and its implications 
on current culture and vice versa.   
 
2.3. Science festival 
An interdisciplinary student team was built and achieved their participation to a prominent  
three-day Science festival. There, they presented an art & science communication exhibition, entitled 
"Illusory vision: the human brain & illusions". This was essentially a STEM group, in which female 
representation was encouraged. The Cognitive Neuroscience course students held a science and science 
communication role. The topic of the exhibition involved the concept of error. “Cognitive Neuroscience 
informs us that error is an integral part of the learning process; our brain, by default, is wired up to make 
mistakes. A visual illusion begins where our senses fail. The false perception of reality, that the brain 
constructs, reveals to us the mechanism by which it operates. So, by learning from our "mistakes", we 
draw useful conclusions about the meaning of error in science and society; since in science we rely on 
experimentation to explore the unknown, while in education we often risk making mistakes in order to 
learn” (Andreou, 2023).  The art exhibition negotiated these ideas in an open discussion with audiences of 
all ages. Alongside optical art printouts, graphic designs, and everyday objects, it mainly included 
exhibits created through 3D (three-dimensional) printing (Figure 1.c); that is, it employed art  
& technology for neuroscience communication of the study of the human brain. Henceforth, in this 
activity, students communicated complex neuroscience ideas to a diverse audience of 15.000 visitors, 
including 30 schools. 
 
Figure 1. Student engagement in Cognitive Neuroscience educational practises (a) The Theatre Analogy (b) Science 
Spring Picnic (c) Science Festival. 
 
 
 
3. Results & discussion 
 
Students were requested to reflect on the aforementioned educational practices via optional, 
anonymously provided, open-ended comments. The student feedback was unanimously positive; 
indicatively one student remarked, “Cognitive Neuroscience is one of the most interesting courses of the 
semester. The professor implemented various outreach activities to establish knowledge. During the 
p-ISSN: 2184-044X  e-ISSN: 2184-1489  ISBN: 978-989-35106-9-8 © 2024
270

Science Picnic, we had the opportunity to present science articles and further understand the concepts, 
through a fun, outdoor activity!”. The comments provide a significant insight to students’ perspective and 
merit further qualitative and quantitative investigation. 
The vast majority of the comments provided affirmation with regards to the mitigation of 
academic burden, student engagement and subject-matter learning; and are in line with studies employing 
active learning strategies (Freeman et al., 2014). Students had the opportunity to elaborate on the science 
involved, in controlled, safe settings. They promoted their collaboration, public speaking, and science 
communication skills, while maintaining and sharing their enthusiasm and curiosity with their peers, their 
instructor and the general public. The incorporation of multidisciplinary practices, as the theatre analogy, 
the science spring picnic, and the participation to a science festival, underlines the multidisciplinary 
nature of the Cognitive Neuroscience field. Novelty and creativity enhanced motivation for learning, 
knowledge acquisition and student engagement in and beyond the classroom. Thus, the active learning 
activities reported here are deemed effective. 
 
 
Acknowledgments  
 
We would like to deeply express our gratitude to the “Circle” theatre for providing their facilities, Petros 
Christakopoulos for physical theatre instruction, Dr. Alexandros Moutzouris for kite flying instruction, 
the Athens Science Festival, for the dissemination of the exhibition. Special thanks to our ASF team and 
our home institution, the University of Ioannina.  
 
 
References 
 
Andreou, 
L.-V. 
(2023). 
Illusory 
vision: 
Illusions 
& 
brain. 
Athens 
Science 
Festival.  
https://www.athens-science-festival.gr/en/exhibitions/illusory-vision-hallucinations-brain/ 
Andreou, L.-V., Aletra, V., Athanasopoulou, G., & Psarropoulou, C. (2018). Good practices in teaching 
English for scientific purposes to biology students in Higher Education. INTED Proceedings. 
https://doi.org/10.21125/inted.2018.1679 
Baars, B. J. (2017). The global workspace theory of consciousness. In The Blackwell Companion to 
Consciousness (pp. 227-242). John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
Baars, B. J., & Gage, N. M. (2010). Cognition, brain, and consciousness: Introduction to cognitive 
neuroscience. Academic Press. 
Basu, A. C., Mondoux, M. A., Whitt, J. L., Isaacs, A. K., & Narita, T. (2017). An Integrative Approach to 
STEM Concepts in an Introductory Neuroscience Course: Gains in Interdisciplinary Awareness. 
Journal of undergraduate neuroscience education: JUNE: a publication of FUN, Faculty for 
Undergraduate Neuroscience, 16(1), A102-A111. 
Freeman, S., Eddy, S. L., McDonough, M., Smith, M. K., Okoroafor, N., Jordt, H., & Wenderoth, M. P. 
(2014). Active learning increases student performance in science, engineering, and Mathematics. 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
National 
Academy 
of 
Sciences, 
111(23), 
8410-8415. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1319030111 
Poeppel, D., Mangun, G. R., Gazzaniga, M. S., & Bassett, D., S. (2020). The cognitive neurosciences. 
The MIT Press. 
Santosh, K., & Nakarmi, S. (2023). Active learning—review. SpringerBriefs in Applied Sciences and 
Technology, 19-30. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-7442-9_3 
Vallet, W., & van Wassenhove, V. (2023). Can cognitive neuroscience solve the lab-dilemma by going 
wild? 
Neuroscience 
& 
Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 
155, 
105463. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105463 
Zepke, N., & Leach, L. (2010). Improving student engagement: Ten proposals for action. Active Learning 
in Higher Education, 11(3), 167-177. https://doi.org/10.1177/1469787410379680 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.36315/2024v1end062
Education and New Developments 2024
271
