Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 3):S759–S761
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02712-1
S.I. : MATERIALISM & METAPHYSICS
Editor’s introduction
Javier Cumpa1
Published online: 23 May 2020
© Springer Nature B.V. 2020
This special issue, The Scientiﬁc Turn: Studies in Materialism and Metaphysics,
collects a number of original articles dealing with philosophical issues concerning
science and metaphysics in the intersection of the areas of ontology, epistemology,
language, and mind.1 The articles contained in this special issue explore different
relationships between what Wilfrid Sellars (1963) called “the manifest image” and
“the scientiﬁc image”. In this connection, the articles provide new assessments of
contemporary debates about non-reductive physicalism and mental causation, infor-
mation integration and phenomenal consciousness, substantialism and factualism in
quantum mechanics, naturalism and perception, identity statements and natural kinds,
truthmaking and dependence, and materialism and Aristotelian hylomorphism on the
theory of knowledge.
The ﬁrst article of the special issue is “Consciousness and Information Integra-
tion” by Berit Brogaard, Bartek Chomanski and Dimitria Electra Gatzia. It explores
three main theories of consciousness for which the notion of information integration
plays a central role for phenomenal consciousness: Information Integration Theory,
Global Workspace Theory, and Attended Intermediate-Level Representation Theory.
The main aim of the article is to show that, contrary to these theories of conscious-
ness, information integration is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for consciousness. The
authors argue that there is empirical evidence against such commitments.
In “The Scientiﬁc Turn In Metaphysics: A Factualist Approach”, Valerio Buonomo
puts forward a defense of factualism, the view that the fundamental ontology of the
world is an ontology of facts. To do so, he presents a criticism of substantialism,
the conception according to which the world is a world of substances. In particular,
Buonomo argues that substantialism does not ﬁt well with fundamental physics. He
attemptstoshowthatsubstantialismcannotmakesenseofquantummechanicalentities
framed in terms of substances and properties. Buonomo recommends an ontology of
facts in which quantum mechanics can be accounted for satisfactorily.
1 The expression “scientiﬁc turn” is Sellars’s. See Sellars (1968: p. vii).
B Javier Cumpa
jcarteseros@ucm.es
1
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
123

760
Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 3):S759–S761
In his article “Perception Naturalised: Relocation and the Sensible Qualities”, Paul
Coates argues for a naturalization of the theory of perception. His purpose is the
articulation of a causal theory of perception, a theory in which the metaphysics of
perception and the science of perception are continuous investigations on the nature
of perception. Coates proposes a causal analysis of the perceptual relationship in
contrast with the theories of naive realism and intentionalism. In this connection, he
presents a defense of the Sellarsian relocation account of sensible qualities, which
strongly relies on a causal theory of perception scientiﬁcally oriented.
Luis Fernández Moreno discusses two central views of Kripke’s theory of theoret-
ical identities involving natural kind terms in “Language and Metaphysics: The Case
of Theoretical Identities”. Namely, the rigid designation of natural kind terms, and
essentialism about natural kinds. He argues that these two views present in Kripke’s
theory are plagued with questionable assumptions about modality and philosophical
analysis. For these reasons, Fernández Moreno concludes that Kripke’s theory fails to
establish the truth and necessity of theoretical identities.
“Truthmaking and Fundamentality” makes a case for a theory of truthmaking
including dependence relations and fundamental truthmakers as alternatives to the
notions of grounding and fundamentality. According to John Heil, in contrast with the
notion of grounding, the dependence of the identity of a whole, an ordinary object,
upon the identity of its parts, the particles which makes it up, does not entail that
there are two degrees of reality: fundamentality and non-fundamentality. For him, an
advantage of truthmaking is that he can appeal to the fundamentality of physics with-
out implying that there is a hierarchy of fundamental and non-fundamental levels of
reality: the ordinary objects and the arrangements of elementary particles.
Walter Sinnott-Armstrong in “Contrastive Mental Causation” defends con-
trastivism about mental causation, a non-reductive physicalist account of mental
causation based on the notion of contrastive causation, by which mental properties
and physical properties can cause the same physical effects in contrast with different
foils. He argues that the notion of contrastive mental causation has the capacity to
solve relevant problems for non-reductive physicalist theories of mental causation,
such as the problems of downward exclusion, redundancy, and overdetermination.
The last article of the special issue is “The Ontological and Epistemological Supe-
riority of Hylomorphism” by Robert C. Koons. It defends Aristotelian hylomorphism,
a theory of intentionality, knowledge, and cognitive normativity in contrast with mate-
rialism and extreme nominalism. According to Koons, neither the former nor the latter
are capable of providing satisfactory accounts of these three human phenomena. He
argues that both intentionality and knowledge presuppose normative facts, and nor-
mativity is fundamentally bio-teleological in character.
Funding Consejería de Educación e Investigación de la Comunidad de Madrid (Project ID: 2016-T1/HUM-
1263).
123

Synthese (2021) 198 (Suppl 3):S759–S761
761
References
Sellars, W. (1963). Philosophy and the scientiﬁc image of man. In W. Sellars (Ed.), Science, perception,
and reality (pp. 1–40). London: Routledge.
Sellars, W. (1968). Science and metaphysics: Variations on Kantian themes. New York: Humanities Press.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional afﬁliations.
123
