Activitas Nervosa Superior 2009;52:2,85-93 
 
 
85 
 
 
 
 
 
IMPLICATIONS OF A FUNDAMENTAL CONSCIOUSNESS 
 
Copthorne Macdonald* 
 
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, 
C1A 8C5 Canada   
Received June 22, 2010; accepted June 27, 2010 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The author postulates a universe in which mentality is as fundamental as physicality, explores the implications of that, 
and presents hypotheses concerning the evolution and functioning of human cognitive systems in such an environment. 
Of the several interpretations of reality which consider the physical and the mental to be equally real and equally funda-
mental, two compatible interpretations are discussed in detail. These are Ervin Laszlo's biperspectival system theory, and 
an elaboration of the perennial philosophy view which incorporates the concepts of algorithm, information, informational 
modulation, and evolution. In this latter view, reality comprises an enduring protophysical, protomental medium mod-
ulated by transient informational patterns. Chance-and-necessity evolution, guided by intrinsic "laws-of-nature" algo-
rithms, produces systems that may be non-functional, physically functional, or physically and mentally functional. Given 
such a reality, the author concludes that human mentality evolved in bottom-up fashion, with mind-associated neuronal 
systems not so much creating mind as organizing a pre-existing propensity for awareness into useful, functional aware-
ness, and providing for its modulation by useful information. 
The author hypothesizes that discrete, localized occurrences of awareness accompany the functioning of relatively simple 
neuronal systems within the columnar structure of the brain's sensory cortex, and that each of these systems information-
ally modulates its associated awareness to create an elemental quale. Together, the awareness elements of a given sensory 
modality constitute a subjective field which, through brain activity not yet fully understood, becomes topologically re-
lated to the body image. The several superposed fields simulate a unified, multi-modal consciousness and constitute a 
global workspace. Selective attention to the qualia in these superposed fields activates neural correlates which facilitate 
situation evaluation and decision making. 
 
Key words: Brain; Consciousness; Physics; Qualia 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
As we assess progress on solving the "hard problem" in 
consciousness studies, certain contributions of David 
Chalmers and Bernard Baars seem particularly signifi-
cant. In his recent writings, Chalmers has resurrected 
the call of earlier writers (e.g., Russell, 1921; Laszlo, 
1972a) to break with the physicalist view of reality. 
Chalmers (1995a) proposed "that conscious experience 
be considered a fundamental feature, irreducible to any-
thing more basic," and suggested (1996) that perhaps 
some form of constrained double-aspect theory is ap-
propriate. Baars' contribution (1988, 1997a, b) is a 
comprehensive "global workspace" model of cognitive 
functioning based on observed psychological and neuro-
logical information flows. It is a model which, in this 
author's view, is compatible with a fundamental mental-
ity and with the hypotheses advanced here. 
In this paper I postulate a universe in which mentality is 
as fundamental is physicality, explore the implications 
of that, and present hypotheses about the evolution and 
functioning of human cognitive systems in such an en-
vironment. Regarding the hard-problem element in 
Baars' theory, I address the dynamics of information 
transfer in both directions between physically-embodied 
and mentally-embodied information. 
 
PRIMAL REALITY: PHYSICAL-ONLY, OR 
MENTAL-PHYSICAL? 
One of the axioms of physicalist science is that the fun-
damental reality of the universe has only a physical  na-  
ACTIVITAS 
NERVOSA 
SUPERIOR 
IDEAS  
&  
PERSPECTIVES 
*Correspondence to: C.  Macdonald, email: cop@copmacdonald.com 

Activitas Nervosa Superior 2010;52:2,85-93 
 
86 
 
ture — that reality has no mental or protomental quali-
ties. We know that research in the highly-physical 
branches of science has flourished with this axiom in 
place. Doesn't this prove that it belongs there? Not nec-
essarily. No problems arose, I would suggest, because 
in the fields of physics and chemistry the axiom was 
never really challenged. Where experiments involve 
overwhelmingly physical phenomena, it simply doesn't 
matter whether mentality exists or not. In those fields, 
the "everything is physical" assumption had little or no 
effect on the choice of experiments, or on the interpreta-
tion of experimental results. In trying to understand 
what the brain is up to, on the other hand, the assump-
tions made about primal reality matter a great deal. 
Most importantly, perhaps, they limit the range of hypo-
theses that are likely to occur to experimenters and 
theorists — or to be taken seriously by them if proposed 
by others. 
For a long time there have also been interpretations of 
reality that see the physical and the mental as being 
equally real and equally fundamental. Forms of this 
perspective appeared first in the perennial philosophy 
traditions, later as dual-aspect monism and the bipers-
pectival systems view, and most recently as panexpe-
rientialism.1 It is a way of looking at things that has 
been advocated for some time as a possible basis for 
solving the mind-body problem (Russell, 1921; Globus, 
1976). 
Globus (1973, p. 154) articulated the view this way: 
"mind is but one aspect of a fundamental neutral reality 
with matter being a second aspect, both aspects having 
equal importance, as two sides of a coin." Wald (1988, 
p. 9) used these words: "[Consciousness] is not some 
iffy phenomenon that we just project on reality; it is at 
the base, at the foundations." Wald also quoted Pauli: 
"To us...the only acceptable point of view appears to be 
one that recognizes both sides of reality — the quantita-
tive and the qualitative, the physical and the psychical 
— as compatible with each other, and can embrace 
them simultaneously. It would be most satisfactory if 
physis and psyche (i.e., matter and mind) could be seen 
as the complementary aspects of the same reality." (p. 
11) 
Rensch (1971, p. 297) said: 
"There is no contrast between mind and matter. We 
must recognize that all "matter" is protopsychical in 
character." 
Like the statements above, most statements about psy-
cho-physical reality tell us little about how fundamental 
consciousness might actually work. System theorist 
Ervin Laszlo's biperspectival systems theory (1972a) is 
more specific. Laszlo, too, considered mentality to be 
fundamental. But he also held that specific expressions 
of mentality occur in a systems context, and that each 
system experiences "sensations appropriate to the or-
ganization of the system" (1972a, p. 172). Just as Laszlo 
saw consciousness going all the way down, he also saw 
systems going all the way down. In the view he articu-
lated, the universe is a hierarchy of "natural systems" 
with the systemic structures at one level in the hierarchy 
being components in the systems at the next, more 
complex level. His hierarchy included atoms, mole-
cules, inorganic crystals, organic cells, multi-cellular 
systems within organisms, and whole organisms. Indi-
vidual systems at all levels are "biperspectival". That is, 
each system can be experienced objectively from the 
outside as a physical entity. But each is also capable of 
experiencing aspects of its own functioning. Laszlo 
ascribed subjectivity to systems as simple as atoms and 
molecules, and speculated that an atom would expe-
rience major events such as an electron jumping from 
one orbit to another or the fission of its nucleus. 
Laszlo also called attention to those much more com-
plex systems which play a subjective role in cognition. 
He called these latter systems "natural-cognitive" sys-
tems, and said of them: 
"[Natural-cognitive systems] are . . . 'biperspectival': 
They are single, self-consistent systems of events, ob-
servable from two points of view. When 'lived' such a 
system is a system of mind-events, viz., a 'cognitive 
system'. When looked at from any other viewpoint, the 
system is a system of physical events, i.e., a 'natural 
system'. The physical and mental sets of events are cor-
relates . . ." (1972a, p. 154) 
In such a cognitive system there would be closed, inac-
cessible subjectivities within each component of the 
system — each atom, molecule, and cell — as well as 
the "mind-event" subjectivity associated with the sys-
tem as a whole. 
When we contemplate psycho-physical theories such as 
Laszlo's, it is important that we don't anthropomorphize. 
Although all physically eventful systems will also be 
mentally eventful, the mental events of most systems 
are not going to be anything like human mental events. 
Nor are they likely to be useful. This is obviously true 
of the physical utility of systems. If I take a handful of 
electronic parts at random, interconnect them in some 
unplanned way, and apply a voltage between two 
points, something electrical will probably happen. A 
current may flow; parts may heat. But nothing particu-
larly useful is likely to happen. Only a tiny percentage 
of possible systemic structures and energizing arrange-
ments allow interesting and useful physical happenings. 
We must expect the same to be true of the mental aspect 
of physical systems. Even if a system has been carefully 
designed for physical utility, there is no reason to sus-
pect that its mental aspect will serve any sort of useful 
function. The analytical challenge is to find out what 
sort of physical arrangements give rise to useful mental-
ity. Later in this paper I share some of my own analysis, 
and discuss what I consider to be the systemic roots of 
the human "global workspace" mental environment. 

Activitas Nervosa Superior 2010;52:2,85-93 
 
 
 
 
 
87 
 
Laszlo's theory gives us a rough sense of mental hap-
penings at the whole-system level, but very few details. 
Fortunately, a recent elaboration of the perennial phi-
losophy view — one that incorporates the concepts of 
algorithm, information, informational modulation, and 
evolution — allows us to see more. Laszlo's theory and 
this other view are based on similar assumptions about 
primal reality, and both focus on the role of systems. 
But this new perspective's kit of conceptual tools helps 
us to explore more deeply the why and how of psycho-
physical systems, and to better understand the processes 
going on within them. 
The perennial philosophy perspective was first intro-
duced to many English-speaking readers by Aldous 
Huxley (1945), but the view has long been espoused by 
Vedanta, Taoism, the Zen and Dzogchen branches of 
Buddhism, and Christian mysticism. It is "a view which 
holds that underlying the transient, ever-changing realm 
of manifest existence is an eternal unmanifested 
Ground, a protophysical, protomental oneness that in-
terpenetrates existence and enables it to be." (Macdo-
nald, 1994, p. 136) 
The ancients were able to apprehend this perspective 
intuitively, but had difficulty expressing it clearly in 
words because they lacked certain key concepts that we 
now have. The present "information age" or postmodern 
refinement of the perspective had to wait until these 
concepts emerged and became part of our cultural voca-
bulary — concepts like medium and message, carrier 
and modulation, algorithm and information. It had to 
wait, for instance, until Claude Shannon (1948) demon-
strated that the fuzzy concept of information could have 
a solid, quantifiable meaning. It had to wait until DNA 
research in the 1950s showed that organisms and other 
physical structures are in fact informational structures. 
It had to wait until the role of algorithms in information 
processing became clear in the 1960s and 1970s, and 
until ideas about parallel processing began to emerge in 
the 1980s. In essence, the interpretation is this: 
Reality consists of an enduring medium modulated by 
transient informational patterns. 
• The medium has a physical aspect, a mental aspect, 
and an algorithmic aspect. 
• Physically, the primal medium is energy or proto-
energy — the ground of the physical universe. 
• Mentally, the primal medium is awareness or proto-
awareness — the ground of mind and subjective expe-
rience. 
• Algorithmically, the medium is the home of "laws of 
nature" algorithms which, during the life of the un-
iverse, allow mental/physical potentials to become actu-
alized. These algorithms, these laws, are the intrinsic 
rules that guide physical, chemical, geological, and bio-
logical change. It is the moment-to-moment functioning 
of these algorithms that form patterns, and modulates 
the primal medium with information — creating, as it 
does, that hierarchy of systems we call the universe. In 
information processing terms, the universe is equipped 
with built-in recursive algorithms which repeatedly take 
the informational situation that exists at this instant and 
transform it into a new informational situation in the 
next. (Macdonald, 1994, p. 136) 
At t = 0, the instant of the Big Bang, our universe is 
generally conceived as just the medium with no, or al-
most no, informational patterning. Within a small frac-
tion of a second after t = 0, however, the informational 
patterning or modulating began (Barrow & Silk, 1980). 
This information-creating, system-building process has 
been described for the early universe by Weinberg 
(1988), for the later universe by Laszlo (1972a, 1972b, 
1987), and overall in narrative form by Swimme and 
Berry (1992). A hierarchy of natural systems evolved in 
response to the guidance offered by those intrinsic algo-
rithms. 
In this view, the physical universe is seen to be an in-
formational patterning of energy. At the submicroscopic 
level that patterning appears as varieties of ener-
gy/matter quanta, and as atomic and molecular struc-
ture. At micro-, meso-, and macroscopic levels it ap-
pears as the space-time patterning of those components 
in complex geological, biological, and astronomical 
systems. The enduring reality is the energy itself (it 
cannot be created or destroyed), but what makes the 
universe so interesting is the ever-changing informa-
tional patterning which energy undergoes as evolution 
proceeds. 
  
INFORMATION, AWARENESS, QUALIA, MIND, 
AND ATTENTION 
The essence of information is difference, or as Gregory 
Bateson put it: "any difference which makes a differ-
ence" (1975, p. 381). Plato may have imagined disem-
bodied information, perfect patterns existing all by 
themselves on some ethereal plane. But real-world in-
formation is not like that; differences that make a dif-
ference must be differences in something. Information 
must have its medium or carrier. So information isn't a 
thing-in-itself, it is a pattern of significant differences 
impressed upon some substrate or medium that serves 
as its carrier. There are both encoded information and 
embodied information. Examples of encoded informa-
tion include written language, DNA, and the ones and 
zeros of computer data. Examples of embodied informa-
tion include the shape of an ocean wave, the structural 
and functional organization of a living organism, and 
the details of a conscious experience. Viewing physical 

Activitas Nervosa Superior 2010;52:2,85-93 
 
88 
 
existence as informationally-patterned energy meets 
little resistance these days. Mathematician Rudy Rucker 
has said: "It is now considered reasonable to say that, at 
the deepest, most fundamental level, our world is made 
of information. . . . For postmodern people, reality is a 
pattern of information, a pattern in fact space" (1987, p. 
31). Physicist John Wheeler put it this way: "all things 
physical are information-theoretic in origin" (1994, p. 
296), and added, "Tomorrow we will have learned to 
understand and express all physics in the language of 
information" (1994, p. 298). 
In addition to being a carrier of physical information, a 
psycho-physical primal reality is also a carrier of mental 
information. We have labels for its mental-carrier as-
pect: awareness, sentience, pure subjectivity, con-
sciousness without content.2 I use the term awareness 
because there are few one-word alternatives, and be-
cause much of the perennial philosophy literature uses 
it.3 Beyond labeling this carrier, we can refer to its roles 
and functions: Awareness and energy are the two faces 
of the primal reality, and in the same sense that energy 
is the enabler of physical activity, awareness is the 
enabler of mental activity. Awareness is the ground, 
medium, and carrier of mind. Awareness is what per-
mits conscious experience. Awareness is the subjective 
capability that is present during ARAS (ascending reti-
cular activating system) arousal. Awareness is the sen-
tient medium that when modulated by neuronally-
generated information becomes mental qualia, mind 
with informational content. But because awareness is 
primal and unique, our powers of definition are limited. 
As with other one-of-a-kind aspects of primal reality 
(energy, time, space), a detailed analogic definition of 
awareness is not possible. 
Traditionally, definitions of primal entities have left 
much to be desired. Asked to define time, Einstein is 
supposed to have said: "Time is what clocks measure." 
A widely-accepted definition of energy is: "Energy is 
the capacity to do work." About awareness we might 
say: "Awareness is the capacity to present information 
subjectively." Each definition is saying something inter-
esting about the primal entity it attempts to define, but 
each falls short of letting us look at the intrinsic nature 
of that entity. To me, this difficulty in defining aware-
ness is itself strong evidence that this aspect of reality 
which I'm labeling awareness — like those other as-
pects: energy, time and space — is fundamental, not 
derivative. 
In the view presented here, awareness and its informa-
tional modulations are intimately associated. This inti-
macy is analogous to the intimacy between the ocean 
and its wave modulations or a radio station's energy 
carrier and its program modulations. In this view there 
is no observer/observed duality, no "ghost in the ma-
chine." There is no experiencer separate from expe-
rience; there is just experiencing. The casual observer of 
mind does see a subject/object duality, but adepts in 
advanced perennial philosophy traditions such as Zen 
and Dzogchen have seen through the apparent duality 
and have become cognizant of the inherently non-dual 
nature of mental experience.4 Varela also commented 
on this: 
"One of the originalities of the phenomenal attitude is 
that it does not seek to oppose the subjective to the ob-
jective, but to move beyond the split into their funda-
mental correlation." (1996, p. 339) 
Those accomplished meditators and Western phenome-
nologists who have paid the price in time and effort to, 
in Wilber's words, "become adequate to the postformal 
data" represent a "validating community of competent 
subjects" who attest to this.5  
Before proceeding, I'd like to clarify my use of three 
other terms. Qualia are awareness-associated informa-
tional artifacts. They are components of the informa-
tional totality which constitutes conscious experience. 
They are specific instances of informationally-
modulated awareness. They are mind content. Edelman 
has said: "Qualia constitute the collection of personal or 
subjective experiences, feelings, and sensations that 
accompany awareness. They are phenomenal states — 
"how things seem to us" as human beings. For example, 
the "redness" of a red object is a quale. Qualia are dis-
criminable parts of a mental scene that nonetheless has 
an overall unity. They may range in intensity and clarity 
from "raw feels" to highly refined discriminada." (1992, 
p. 114) 
In another sense, qualia are mental metaphors that sym-
bolize the modulating stimulus, or are elements of a 
mental analog of some perceived reality (Jaynes, 1982). 
For example, specific odors are mental metaphors for 
specific air-borne molecules. And visual experience is a 
reasonably accurate mental analog (map) of the optical 
scene projected on the retinas. 
Mind is the space-like awareness environment in which 
qualia appear, the subjective global workspace, the 
composite experiential field. Attention is a condition of 
mind and brain marked by heightened, and usually se-
lective, noting of qualia. Research tells us that selective 
attention is not caused by varying the intensity of 
awareness — which is simply present during periods of 
arousal and not present during deep sleep — but by 
selectively gating neuronal information.6 The usual hu-
man pattern is to attend intently to one quale or aspect 
of a quale at a time, although wide-focus, multi-qualia 
modes of attending can be learned (Fehmi and Fritz, 
1980). 
 
WHY EVOLVE A MIND? 
I agree with Chalmers when he said, "For a satisfactory 
theory, we need to know more than which processes 
give rise to experience; we also need an account of why 
and how. A full theory of consciousness must build an 

Activitas Nervosa Superior 2010;52:2,85-93 
 
 
 
 
 
89 
 
explanatory bridge" (1995b). The model of conscious 
functioning that my own mind-watching and literature-
review activities have led me to adopt is a theater mod-
el, similar to, and I believe largely compatible with, 
Bernard Baars Global Workplace Theory (Baars, 1988, 
1997a, b; Newman and Baars, 1993). What I propose to 
contribute to that view is some insight into why and 
how the global workplace came into existence, and per-
haps a few fresh thoughts about its functioning. 
Let's begin with the key question posed in Vol. 1, No. 2 
of the Journal of Consciousness Studies: "Why, in prin-
ciple, should a neuronal system of any degree of com-
plexity give rise to the phenomenal experience of con-
sciousness?" My answer has two parts: If we start with 
radical physicalist assumptions about the nature of reali-
ty, then there is no reason why, "in principle". a neuron-
al system should give rise to conscious experience. If, 
however, we start with the assumption that primal reali-
ty is as described in this paper, then the arising of con-
scious experience is not astonishing at all. It's just what 
we might expect. If reality is this second way, then the 
role of the neuronal system is not to mysteriously create 
awareness and mind from alien substance. Rather, it is 
to organize a pre-existing propensity for awareness into 
useful, functional awareness, and provide for its mod-
ulation by useful information. Again we face the utility 
issue. If awareness is as primal and ubiquitous as ener-
gy, then it will be present in every system. But whether 
or not it plays a functional role will depend on how a 
particular system has been configured, and the nature of 
its connections to the world outside it. 
It is quite possible that during pre-biological evolution 
(the cosmological and geological phases of evolution) 
awareness played no functional role. It is clear, howev-
er, that at some point during biological evolution, 
awareness was harnessed and put to work. If, today, we 
humans were given the task of designing systems that 
have useful mental characteristics, we quite literally 
would not know where to begin. Yet evolution — with 
its slow, plodding, and chance-and-necessity genius— 
did a magnificent job of it. As I see it, this was possible 
because the medium on which the cosmic algorithms 
have been operating is a mental-physical medium, not 
just a physical one. 
Early in the evolution of living things, organisms exhi-
bited sensitivity to their environments, and some were 
able to respond to environmental changes. Many types 
of plants align themselves to maximize their exposure to 
light. Paramecia move away from irritating stimuli. 
These behaviors appear to most scientists to arise from 
totally physical, reflex-like mechanisms. They feel that 
subjectivity and mind play no functional role, and this 
may well be true. It may even be true of amphibians. In 
the classic Lettvin, J. et al. (1965) study of "What the 
frog's eye tells the frog's brain". the frog's eye is re-
ported to have different types of retinal sensors that give 
rise, quite automatically it seems, to a limited set of 
stereotyped behaviors. If a small dark object passes 
across the frog's field of vision (a fly, perhaps?), the 
frog's tongue reflexively darts out. If the overall light 
level suddenly drops (the shadow of a hawk, perhaps?) 
the frog reflexively jumps off the lily pad. Whether or 
not these organisms have a functional consciousness 
may become clear when we finally understand how 
human mentality works at the neural level. 
As evolution progressed, species proliferated and eco-
systems became more complex. Increasingly intricate 
forms of animal life emerged to take advantage of new-
ly created environmental niches. Increasingly sophisti-
cated sensory systems evolved. New survival opportuni-
ties opened up; but so did new threats to survival. As a 
result of all this, evolutionary pressure arose for better 
situation-analysis and decision-making capabilities. 
With just one perceptual mode (say chemical sensitivity 
or taste) and a limited number of action modes (say 
eating and flight), purely physical, reflex-type control of 
behavior would appear to be adequate. But in organisms 
equipped to receive several different kinds of highly-
detailed sensory information simultaneously, and to 
respond in many different ways, the demands on the 
control system increase dramatically. To avoid beha-
vioral chaos or gridlock from competing information, 
sophisticated analysis and decision-making systems 
were needed, and eventually evolved. 
Artificial intelligence research has shown that it is not 
easy to sort out the relevant from the irrelevant, or even 
to make figure/ground discriminations using physical-
only approaches (Hurlbert and Poggio, 1986). I am sug-
gesting that mentality — and selective attention in par-
ticular — was evolution's way of solving this problem. I 
am not saying that it is impossible, in principle, to per-
form these same tasks using only the physical aspect of 
systems and computational techniques. Rather, I'm hy-
pothesizing that this is not what evolution did. If we 
human designers were given the task, we would be 
forced to take an all-physical approach (the only one 
with which we are currently familiar), and given suffi-
cient time and resources we might eventually succeed in 
solving the problem that way. Evolution, however, had 
another design option, one not yet open to us: the option 
of incorporating mentality as well as physicality into its 
designs. This, of course, is not a new idea. Baars 
(1997a) notes William James's comment: "The study . . 
. of the distribution of consciousness shows it to be ex-
actly such as we might expect in an organ added for the 
sake of steering a nervous system grown too compli-

Activitas Nervosa Superior 2010;52:2,85-93 
 
90 
 
cated to regulate itself" (James, 1890/1983, p. 141). 
Theorist of evolution Harry Jerison put it this way: "I 
regard the mind and conscious experience as construc-
tions of nervous systems to handle the overwhelming 
amount of information that they process" (1973, p. 4). 
Evolution's mental-physical approach seems to have 
been this: Create neuronal systems that generate mental 
metaphors or analogs of the immediate physical situa-
tion, and bring them together in one mental "space." 
Combine this with a selective attention mechanism 
which allows the superposed mental fields to be 
scanned for qualia that have survival or reproductive 
significance, and arrange for the neuronal correlates of 
attended-to qualia to become available for unconscious 
computational processing.7  
In humans, if the processing deems the quale to be ex-
tremely significant it will occasionally give rise to an 
automatic reaction, as when someone jumps immediate-
ly to save a child in danger. Usually, however, the com-
putational processing simply suggests a course of ac-
tion. It does this by causing a thought, feeling, or emo-
tion to appear in the mind along with the information 
already present there. A third possibility arises when the 
processing decides that the quale being attended to is 
not significant. In that case, an unconscious instruction 
restarts attentional scanning. 
In this view, the conscious field is the great simplifier. 
The creation of a mental "workspace" allows large 
amounts of relevant and irrelevant information to be 
brought together in one subjective arena. Selective at-
tention then allows that mass of data to be rapidly sur-
veyed in serial fashion. Neuronal correlates of items 
attended to are checked computationally for relevance. 
Different kinds of relevance cause different kinds of 
data-processing outputs to appear in the mind: mental 
images; thoughts; and feelings of pleasure, pain, fear, 
anger, hate, or tenderness, for example. These newly-
arisen qualia are themselves then available for possible 
selection by attention, and if selected, their neuronal 
correlates would be used as input data for further 
processing. At the end of all the processing, the ultimate 
behavioral decision is frequently accompanied by a 
mental correlate of its own — a YES feeling, a NO feel-
ing, fear, anger, etc. 
This kind of analysis-and-control system is flexible. 
Because evolution's behavioral suggestions — lust, fear, 
hunger, anger, a liking for sugar, etc. — are presented 
mentally, they are not hard-wired action imperatives. 
Priorities can be accommodated; "Flee the tiger rather 
than grab the fruit". And learning can override evolutio-
nary messages; "I'm already overweight, so I'll ignore 
the impulse to have dessert." Through our immersion in 
culture we acquire a learned hierarchy of values which 
can, in various circumstances, override evolution's de-
fault hierarchy. If our learning has been appropriate to 
our reality, then we will behave appropriately and wise-
ly in a much wider range of circumstances than if our 
control system had been hard wired in another era. 
 
SOME NEUROLOGICAL SPECULATIONS 
Postulating that we live in a two-aspect, biperspectival 
universe allows us to take seriously the possibility that 
for a relatively primitive mentality to come into exis-
tence, an extremely complex brain is not needed. If sub-
jectivity is fundamental, then we should expect that 
relatively simple forms of mind would require only rela-
tively simple systems for their arising. It appears that 
even in the human brain, awareness may not arise as 
one unified whole, but through the integration of many 
localized instances of awareness, each of which is asso-
ciated with the functioning of a relatively simple local 
system. 
Although human awareness seems unified, research 
during the past few decades indicates that it is not. Hebb 
(1980, p. 40), in referring to the split-brain patients of 
Bogen, Gazzaniga and Sperry, notes that after the two 
brain hemispheres were separated surgically "a patient 
might seem to have two minds, a left-hand and a right-
hand mind." MacLean (1977, p. 313) saw "three men-
talities." He felt that each part of the "triune brain" (rep-
tilian brain, limbic system, and neocortex) has "its own 
subjectivity." Jackendoff (1990, p. 52) saw yet another 
"disunity in awareness" — a disunity in which each 
sensory modality has its own separate awareness. 
I am suggesting that the separate subjective fields asso-
ciated with vision, somatosensory experience, hearing, 
smell, and taste are each made to relate topologically to 
the body image by processes of arrangement and bind-
ing not yet fully understood. The effect is a superposi-
tioning of the individual fields. They overlay and over-
lap much like multiple transparencies laid on an over-
head projector, with all five sensory fields occupying 
roughly the same subjective space.8 Together, the su-
perposed fields simulate a unified multi-modal con-
sciousness, and constitute a subjective global work-
space. 
I am also suggesting that even within a single brain re-
gion or sensory modality, awareness may not be unified. 
Let us think for a moment about the discrete nature of 
the information involved in visual perception. Although 
human visual experience seems smooth and continuous, 
we know that the information which gives rise to it is 
actually discrete, segmented, elemental. Being derived 
from the outputs of discrete retinal neurons, visual ex-
perience is like a computer image or newspaper picture 
in that it contains a limited number of visual elements. 
Visual experience seems continuous because the ele-
ments are tightly packed, and because there are so many 
of them. But it is not continuous. The seemingly smooth 
and continuous experiences of sound and touch also 
originate in impulses from discrete sensory neurons in 
the cochlea and skin. If the information that fills the 

Activitas Nervosa Superior 2010;52:2,85-93 
 
 
 
 
 
91 
 
various sensory fields seems continuous but isn't, why 
assume that the awareness associated with that informa-
tion is continuous? I am suggesting that it is more rea-
sonable from an evolutionary and systems point of view 
to assume that each element of conscious data is asso-
ciated with its own element of awareness. 
My hypothesis is that in the visual, auditory, and soma-
tosensory cortex of the human brain there exist a multi-
tude of relatively simple neuronal systems, each of 
which organizes the medium's inherent subjective ca-
pacity into a functioning elemental awareness. If an 
appropriate neuronal signal is received from an external 
source, each of these mind-element systems also infor-
mationally modulates its elemental awareness, creating 
in the process an elemental quale — a pictorial element 
in the case of visual perception, part of an auditory ex-
perience, or a localized sensation in the somatic sensory 
field. The binding and orienting problems still need to 
be solved, but it may turn out that what is being bound 
and oriented are a large number of quite small elements 
of awareness — each with its associated informational 
modulation. 
The visual system has been more extensively studied 
than the auditory or somatosensory systems, and to sup-
port "the involvement of early parts of visual cortex in 
visual consciousness." Baars (1997a) presented four 
"convergent lines of evidence" (p. 68): 
First, when Area V1 is lost, people report a loss of visu-
al conscious experience, though they can still "guess" at 
the objects their eyes are looking at. Second, when the 
early visual areas are stimulated by a gentle current, 
people report conscious visual flashes (phosphenes). 
Third, when people are conscious of a visual object, we 
can see the early visual areas "light up" in PET scans, 
indicating a distinct increase in neural activity. Fourth, 
recording of single cells in visual cortex indicates that 
there is a difference between the conscious and uncons-
cious flows of stimulation (pp. 100-01). 
Cortical areas A1 and S1 play roles in auditory and so-
matosensory perception analogous to V1's role in vi-
sion. The bilateral destruction of A1 produces cortical 
deafness (Aitkin, 1990), and the destruction of S1 re-
sults in the inability to consciously perceive stimuli at 
the body surface (Schmidt, 1986). Thus, it seems likely 
that A1 and S1 are where the space-like fields of audito-
ry and somatosensory awareness and qualia are generat-
ed — although secondary processing areas might also 
be involved. The neural columns which are present in 
these sensory processing areas seem likely candidates 
for those awareness-organizing, awareness-modulating 
subsystems mentioned above. One suggestive piece of 
data is that the observed resolution of visual data in V1 
is similar to column spacing. F.T. Hambrecht (1992) 
electrically stimulated the foveal region of V1 and de-
termined that phosphenes produced by simultaneous 
stimulation through two electrodes 500 microns apart 
appeared as two separate phosphenes, but as just a sin-
gle phosphene when electrodes were 250 microns apart. 
Another reason for highlighting these neural columns is 
that cortical levels 2, 3, and 4 appear to be involved in 
the processing of sensory data, and levels 5 and 6 ap-
pear to be involved in arousal and the presence or ab-
sence of consciousness.9 This suggests the possibility 
that neurons in layers 5 and 6 may be involved in orga-
nizing awareness tendencies into useful awareness, and 
that neurons in the middle layers may be involved in 
modulating that awareness with sensory data and "sen-
sory-like" imagined or remembered data. 
It is also possible to describe the situation from Laszlo's 
"biperspectival system" point of view. From that pers-
pective, those small awareness-organizing neuronal 
systems are subsystems of the overall "global work-
space" cognitive system, and their functioning is an 
integral part of the larger system's functioning. As mod-
ulating signals from the computational environment are 
processed by the columnar subsystems, subsystem 
physical states constantly change — elemental physical 
events occur. Those physical changes are accompanied 
by correlated changes in subsystem subjective states — 
elemental mental events occur. 
The many mind-element subsystems, together with 
those brain subsystems responsible for their topological 
organization, constitute a single "natural-cognitive sys-
tem" whose interior state is the subjective global work-
space. Human consciousness is this system's self-
experience. 
 
NEXT STEPS 
What's next? What can be done to investigate bottom-
up hypotheses such as those put forth here? How can we 
test their validity and determine their worth? A few 
thoughts: 
• First, previous experimental work could be reconsi-
dered with the present set of ideas in mind. Would this, 
in at least a few situations, lead to a different interpreta-
tion of the original data? Is there previous experimental 
work that clearly refutes the speculations and hypothes-
es put forth in this paper? Is there work that lends sup-
port or confirmation? 
• Could an experiment be devised to temporarily block 
arousal in a portion of V1 without interfering with in-
formation processing activities in the blocked region? 
How would this affect subjective experience? And what 
would the change in subjective experience tell us about 
the validity of the ideas presented here? Obviously, it is 
important to continue work on the binding problem, and 

Activitas Nervosa Superior 2010;52:2,85-93 
 
92 
 
to search for the mechanism which aligns whole fields 
of awareness elements with the body image. Equally 
obvious is the importance of lesion analysis and brain-
scan technology in shedding light on brain/mind corre-
lations. The eventual task will be to "reverse-engineer 
the wetware" to determine, in detail, how neural func-
tioning actually does give rise to subjective experience. 
But first we need to know that we are heading in the 
right direction. We need experiments that help deter-
mine whether or not consciousness really is a bottom-up 
phenomenon, a fundamental feature of the universe. 
  
NOTES 
1 For a discussion of panexperientialism see de Quincey 
(1994).  
2 Can we really talk about consciousness without con-
tent, awareness without informational modulation, mind 
without qualia? Absence of mind content is not part of 
our everyday experience, but accomplished meditators 
approach this condition. They find that during pro-
longed periods of meditation, mind content drops to-
ward the asymptotic limit of no content. They also find 
that awareness remains present, irrespective of the level 
of mental information. At some point in their practice, 
many advanced practitioners experience a cognitive 
shift in which awareness becomes figure rather than 
ground, and is thereafter recognized as a tangible reality 
in its own right.  
3 I do realize that the term is also used in other senses 
— Chalmers" use, for example (1996, p. 28).  
4 Varela has suggested that both Western Phenomenol-
ogy (1996) and Buddhist meditation (Varela, et al., 
1991) are useful techniques for the serious investigation 
of conscious experience. Wilber (1997a, b) and I (Mac-
donald, 1996) have made similar suggestions. Discip-
lines that I have found particularly fruitful are the Vi-
passana and Dzogchen varieties of Buddhist meditation, 
and the Western practice called Open Focus (Fehmi and 
Fritz, 1980).  
5 Where appropriate, researchers will have to engage in 
various injunctions that transform their own conscious-
ness if they are to be adequate to the postformal data. 
You cannot vote on the truth of the Pythagorean Theo-
rem if you do not learn geometry (the injunction); like-
wise, you cannot vote on the truth of Buddha Nature if 
you do not learn meditation. All valid knowledge has 
injunction, apprehension and confirmation; the injunc-
tions are all of the form, "if you want to know this, you 
must do this" — and thus, when it comes to conscious-
ness studies itself, the utterly obvious but much-resisted 
conclusion is that certain interior injunctions have to be 
followed by the researchers themselves. If we do not do 
this, then we will not know this (1997a, p. 91).  
6 Newman and Baars (1993) report that "virtually all 
information conveyed to the cortex from visual, audito-
ry, and somatosensory pathways is relayed through the 
thalamus" and that "gatelets" in the reticular nucleus of 
the thalamus regulate the "flow of information from the 
thalamus to the cortex." They report that these gatelets 
are opened and closed in response to control signals 
from various regions of the cortex.  
7 A number of researchers have presented results that 
link conscious experience and the attentional process to 
specific physical brain correlates. For example, Wurtz, 
Goldberg, and Robinson, reporting on their primate 
research, said: If the monkey is alert, but not attending 
to anything in particular, the response of the nerve cells 
in [the posterior parietal cortex] is relatively uniform. 
When the monkey begins to attend to some object, 
however, the nerve cells in the posterior parietal cortex 
that are related to the object because it is in their recep-
tive field begin to discharge more intensely. . . . We do 
not know how the enhancement arises, and in the ab-
sence of this knowledge it is tempting to say that the 
enhanced response amounts in itself to visual attention. 
It remains quite possible, however, that the enhance-
ment is only a correlate of visual attention (1982, p. 
124). 
It is also possible to pay attention to visual attributes 
other than position, and to detect, in the secondary visu-
al processing areas, physical correlates of that kind of 
attending. As Corbetta, Miezin, Dobmeyer, Shulman, 
and Petersen found: "Attention to basic visual attributes 
such as shape, color, or velocity appears to influence . . . 
physiological measures of visual processing. . . . Phy-
siologically, neural activity is increased in extrastriate 
regions specialized for processing information related to 
the selected visual attribute" (1990, p. 1556).  
8 Should you wish to investigate this for yourself, I 
have elsewhere (Macdonald 1993) described a little 
experiment: "If I look straight ahead and move my 
hands around to find the edges of the visually-active 
part of the field, I conclude that it's about one unit high 
and three or four wide. If I then put a bottle of perfume 
under my nose, the experience of odour fills much of 
this same field — being most intense in the centre, less 
so at the edges. If I next bite into a piece of fruit and 
pay attention to my experience of taste as I chew it, I 
find that taste occupies a more sharply defined zone 
than odour. Taste sensations appear in a horizontally-
oriented oval located below the centre of visual data. 
Touch, body sensations, and sounds also appear in the 
awareness field, sometimes extending beyond the edges 
of the visual data. The location of most body feelings 
and sensations is sharply defined, while the direction of 
most sounds is just roughly indicated" (pp. 25-6).  
9 See, for example, Livingstone and Hubel (1981). 
  
REFERENCES 
Aitkin, L. (1990). The Auditory Cortex: Structural and func-
tional bases of auditory perception. London: Chapman and 
Hall. 

Activitas Nervosa Superior 2010;52:2,85-93 
 
 
 
 
 
93 
 
Baars, B.J. (1988). A cognitive theory of consciousness. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Baars, B.J. (1997a). In the Theater of Consciousness: The 
Workplace of the Mind. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Baars, B.J. (1997b). In the Theatre of Consciousness: Global 
Workspace Theory, A Rigorous Scientific Theory of Con-
sciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 4, 292-309. 
Barrow, J. D., & Silk, J. (1980). The Structure of the Early 
Universe. Scientific American, 242, 118-128. 
Bateson, G. (1975). Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: 
Ballantine Books. 
Chalmers, D.J. (1995a). The puzzle of conscious experience, 
Scientific American, December, 80-86. 
Chalmers, D. J. (1995b). Facing up to the problem of con-
sciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2, 200-19. 
Chalmers, D.J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a 
Fundamental Theory. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Corbetta, M., Miezin, F. M., Dobmeyer, S., Shulman, G.L., & 
Petersen, S. E. (1990). Attentional Modulation of Neuronal 
Processing of Shape, Color, and Velocity in Humans. Science, 
248, 1556-1559. 
de Quincey, C (1994). Consciousness All the Way Down? An 
Analysis of McGinn’s Critique of Panexperientialism. Journal 
of Consciousness Studies, 1, 217-229. 
Edelman, G.M. (1992). Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Mat-
ter of the Mind.  New York: Basic Books. 
Fehmi, L. G. & Fritz, G. (1980). Open Focus: The Attentional 
Foundation of Health and Well-Being. Somatics, 2, 4-30. 
Globus, G. (1973). Consciousness and Brain I, The Identity 
Thesis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 8,  153-160. 
Globus, G. (1976). Mind Structure and Contradiction. In G. 
Globus, G. Maxwell, & I. Savodnik, (Eds.). Consciousness 
and the Brain: A Scientific and Philosophical Inquiry. New 
York: Plenum Press. 
Hambrecht, F. T. et al. (1992). Feasibility of a Visual Prosthe-
sis for the Blind Utilizing Intracortical Microstimulation. (Au-
thor-paginated reprint), Proceedings of the 4th Vienna Interna-
tional Workshop on Functional Electrostimulation, Baden, 
Austria: Department of Biomedical Engineering and Physics, 
University of Vienna. 
Hebb, D.O. (1980). Essay on Mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 
Humphrey, N. (1992). A History of the Mind: Evolution and 
the Birth of Consciousness. New York: Simon and Schuster. 
Hurlbert, A. & Poggio, T. (1986). Do Computers Need Atten-
tion? Nature, 321, 651. 
Huxley, A. (1945). The Perennial Philosophy. New York and 
London: Harper and Brothers. 
Jackendoff, R. (1990), Consciousness and the Computational 
Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
James, W. (1890/1983), The Principles of Psychology. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Jaynes, J. (1982). The Origin of Consciousness in the Break-
down of the Bicameral Mind. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin. 
Jerison, H. J. (1973). Evolution of the Brain and Intelligence. 
New York: Academic Press. 
Laszlo, E. (1972a). Introduction to Systems Philosophy: To-
ward a New Paradigm of Contemporary Thought. New York: 
Gordon and Breach. 
Laszlo, E. (1972b). The Systems View of the World. New 
York: George Braziller. 
Laszlo, E. (1987). Evolution: The Grand Synthesis. Boston: 
Shambhala. 
Lettvin, J. et al (1965). What the frog’s eye tells the frog’s 
brain. In W. McCullock, Ed., Embodiments of Mind. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Livingstone, M. S. & Hubel D. H. (1981). Effects of sleep and 
arousal on the processing of visual information in the cat. 
Nature, 291, 554-561. 
Macdonald, C. (1993). Toward Wisdom. Toronto: Hounslow 
Press. 
Macdonald, C. (1994). An Energy/Awareness/ Information 
Interpretation of Physical and Mental Reality’, Zygon: Jour-
nal of Religion and Science, 29, 135-151. 
Macdonald, C. (1996). The necessity for developing skill at 
mind-process observation, and a suggested methodology. 
Presented at the Tucson II Toward a Science of Consciousness 
1996 conference. 
MacLean, Paul (1977), On the Evolution of Three Mentalities. 
In S. Arieti and G. Chzanowki (Eds.), New Dimensions in 
Psychiatry: A World View, Vol. 2, chap. 15. New York: John 
Wiley and Sons. 
Newman, J. & Baars B. J. (1993). A Neural Attentional Model 
for Access to Consciousness: A Global Workspace Perspec-
tive. Concepts in Neuroscience, 4, 255-90. 
Rensch, B. (1971). Biophilosophy. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press. 
Rucker, R. (1987). Mind Tools: The Five Levels of Mathemat-
ical Reality. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co. 
Russell, B. (1921). The Analysis of Mind. London: George 
Allen and Unwin. 
Schmidt, R. F. (Ed.) (1986). Fundamentals of Sensory Physi-
ology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
Shannon, C.E. (1948). A mathematical theory of information. 
Bell System Technical Journal, 27, 379-423, and 623-656. 
Swimme, B., & Berry, T. (1992). The Universe Story. San 
Francisco: Harper San Francisco. 
Varela, F.J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The Embo-
died Mind: Cognitive Science and the Human Experience. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Varela, F.,J. (1996). Neruophenomenology: A methodological 
remedy for the hard problem. Journal of Consciousness Stu-
dies, 3, 330-49. 
Wald, G. (1988). Cosmology of life and mind. Los Alamos 
Science: Fellows Colloquium, Issue 16. 
Weinberg, S. (1988). The First Three Minutes: A Modern 
View of the Origin of the Universe. (Updated ed.) New York: 
Basic Books. 
Wheeler, J.A. (1994). At Home in the Universe. Woodbury, 
NY: American Institute of Physics Press. 
Wilber, K. (1997a). An Integral Theory of Consciousness. 
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 4, 71-92. 
Wilber, K. (1997b), The Eye of Spirit: An Integral Vision for 
a World Gone Slightly Mad. Boston: Shambhala. 
Wurtz, R. W., Goldberg, M. E., & Robinson, D. L. (1982). 
Brain Mechanisms of Visual Attention. Scientific American, 
246, 124-135. 
 
