Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
1	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 06 April 2022
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.846931
Edited by: 
Inês Hipólito, 
Humboldt University of Berlin, 
Germany
Reviewed by: 
Pierre Gander, 
University of Gothenburg, Sweden
Antonio Chella, 
University of Palermo, Italy
Ricardo R. Gudwin, 
State University of Campinas, Brazil
*Correspondence: 
Christian Kronsted 
christian.k@memphis.edu
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Human-Media 
Interaction, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 31 December 2021
Accepted: 02 March 2022
Published: 06 April 2022
Citation:
Kronsted C, Kugele S, Neemeh ZA, 
Ryan KJ Jr and Franklin S (2022) 
Embodied Intelligence: Smooth 
Coping in the Learning Intelligent 
Decision Agent Cognitive 
Architecture.
Front. Psychol. 13:846931.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.846931
Embodied Intelligence: Smooth 
Coping in the Learning Intelligent 
Decision Agent Cognitive 
Architecture
Christian Kronsted 1,2*, Sean Kugele 2,3, Zachariah A. Neemeh 1,2, Kevin J. Ryan Jr 4 and 
Stan Franklin 2
1 Department of Philosophy, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, United States, 2 Institute for Intelligent Systems, 
University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, United States, 3 Department of Computer Science, University of Memphis, 
Memphis, TN, United States, 4 Department of Philosophy, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Knoxville, TN, United States
Much of our everyday, embodied action comes in the form of smooth coping. Smooth 
coping is skillful action that has become habituated and ingrained, generally placing less 
stress on cognitive load than considered and deliberative thought and action. When 
performed with skill and expertise, walking, driving, skiing, musical performances, and 
short-order cooking are all examples of the phenomenon. Smooth coping is characterized 
by its rapidity and relative lack of reflection, both being hallmarks of automatization. 
Deliberative and reflective actions provide the contrast case. In Dreyfus’ classic view, 
smooth coping is “mindless” absorption into action, being in the flow, and any reflective 
thought will only interrupt this flow. Building on the pragmatist account of Dewey, others, 
such as Sutton, Montero, and Gallagher, insist on the intelligent flexibility built into smooth 
coping, suggesting that it is not equivalent to automatization. We seek to answer two 
complementary challenges in this article. First, how might we model smooth coping in 
autonomous agents (natural or artificial) at fine granularity? Second, we use this model 
of smooth coping to show how we might implement smooth coping in artificial intelligent 
agents. We develop a conceptual model of smooth coping in LIDA (Learning Intelligent 
Decision Agent). LIDA is an embodied cognitive architecture implementing the global 
workspace theory of consciousness, among other psychological theories. LIDA’s 
implementation of consciousness enables us to account for the phenomenology of smooth 
coping, something that few cognitive architectures would be able to do. Through the fine 
granular analysis of LIDA, we argue that smooth coping is a sequence of automatized 
actions intermittently interspersed with consciously mediated action selection, 
supplemented by dorsal stream processes. In other words, non-conscious, automatized 
actions (whether learned or innate) often require occasional bursts of conscious cognition 
to achieve the skillful and flexible adjustments of smooth coping. In addition, never-
conscious dorsal stream information and associated sensorimotor processes provide 
further online adjustments during smooth coping. To achieve smooth coping in LIDA 
we introduce a new module to the LIDA cognitive architecture the Automatized Action 

Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
2	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Selection sub-module. Our complex model of smooth coping borrows notions of 
“embodied intelligence” from enactivism and augments these by allowing representations 
and more detailed mechanisms of conscious control. We explore several extended 
examples of smooth coping, starting from basic activities like walking and scaling up to 
more complex tasks like driving and short-order cooking.
Keywords: smooth coping, automatization, action selection, cognitive architecture, embodied cognition, global 
workspace theory, LIDA
INTRODUCTION
In this article, we develop a conceptual model of smooth coping 
using LIDA (Learning Intelligent Decision Agent), a hybrid, 
embodied cognitive architecture implementing the Global 
Workspace Theory (GWT) of consciousness (Baars, 1988), the 
perception–action cycle (Neisser, 1976; Freeman, 2002; Fuster, 
2004; Cutsuridis et  al., 2011), grounded cognition (Harnad, 
1990; Barsalou, 1999), appraisal theory (Lazarus, 1991; Roseman 
and Smith, 2001), long-term working memory (Ericsson and 
Kintsch, 1995), and other cognitive theories. It aims to be  a 
“unified theory of cognition” (Newell, 1994), taking these and 
other disparate theories, and uniting them under a single, 
comprehensive architecture. LIDA is a conceptual and 
computational architecture that has been used as the basis for 
software and robotic agents. The current paper is the theoretical 
overview of how to implement smooth coping in LIDA. Following 
research will implement formalisms, code agents, and test the 
agents in various environments. We  see this work as a first 
step toward robot implementation of smooth coping that will 
fit with current trends in robotics, such as learning by imitation 
(Bullard et  al., 2019).
Smooth coping is the process of skillfully and adaptively 
acting, typically toward the completion of a task. Smooth coping 
covers a wide range of skillful behaviors, from those that are 
relatively basic like breathing or suckling, to those that are 
learned through painstaking training, as in becoming a pilot 
(Dreyfus and Dreyfus, 1980). Masterfully driving through traffic, 
skiing a slope, or running an obstacle course are all classic 
examples of smooth coping. However, the concept can also 
include cooking, herding sheep, dancing, tidying up, and many 
other activities in which it is possible to reach a state of 
optimized 
performance. 
The 
concept 
originates 
in 
phenomenological philosophy, particularly in the embodied 
phenomenologies of Heidegger, 1928/2010 and Merleau-Ponty, 
1945/2012. Both of these thinkers were reacting against an 
intellectualized vision of human existence in philosophy and 
psychology that saw us as essentially epistemic agents geared 
toward knowing the world. As an alternative, they posited a 
vision of human existence that was, at its root, pragmatically 
oriented toward action and movement, and (for Merleau-Ponty) 
that was based in the agent’s embodiment.
In smooth coping the agent is not merely doing disjointed 
multitasking nor just doing automatized actions. Rather, most 
of the agent’s cognitive processes cohere toward fulfilling one 
distal intention. We  outline how a LIDA agent might achieve 
smooth coping, and provide three case studies: walking, driving, 
and short-order cooking (see section “Conclusion”). Importantly, 
smooth coping in LIDA typically requires a “meshed” combination 
of conscious, consciously mediated, and never-conscious processes 
interwoven within a continuing series of cognitive cycles 
implemented using the Global Workspace Theory of consciousness 
(Franklin and Baars, 2010). Historically, in the LIDA conceptual 
model, Action Selection has only been able to choose one, 
and only one, action at a time. In this paper, we  make a 
significant contribution to the LIDA model by introducing a 
new sub-module to Action Selection: Automatized Action 
Selection (AAS). This sub-module allows for concurrent selection 
of actions—AAS is capable choosing automatized actions in 
parallel. Furthermore, AAS runs in parallel with the original 
Action Selection algorithm which continues to choose one 
action at the time.
We begin by fleshing out recent debates on smooth coping 
and highlight the meshed nature of cognition supporting it 
(Christensen et al., 2016; Gallagher and Varga, 2020). We then 
introduce the LIDA model and the aspects of LIDA relevant 
to this project. For a more complete overview of LIDA, 
we  recommend reading the tutorial and our two most recent 
papers (Franklin et  al., 2016; Kronsted et  al., 2021; Neemeh 
et  al., 2021). We  illustrate how smooth coping might take 
place in a LIDA agent by going through three case studies of 
increasing complexity: walking alone, driving in traffic, and 
short-order cooking (see section “Conclusion”).
SMOOTH COPING
Although there has been a recent uptick in debates on smooth 
coping, the topic can be  traced at least back to Aristotle and 
the notion of phronesis (typically translated as “practical wisdom”). 
Smooth coping debates since their earliest inceptions have 
typically been tied to culture and sociality—to smoothly maneuver 
the world is often to do so in rich social cultural contexts 
(Rietveld and Kiverstein, 2014). Thus, debates on smooth coping 
cut across discussions in social cognition, anthropology, 
performance studies, and discussions of “expert performance” 
(Cappuccio, 2019).
The crossover between motoric and cultural discussions when 
dealing with smooth coping is especially pronounced when 
looking at the phenomenological tradition. In the twentieth 
century, Martin Heidegger introduced the term Zuhandenheit 
in his monumental Being and Time (1927). Often translated 

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
3	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
as “readiness-to-hand,” Zuhandenheit refers to a mode of 
comportment that is pre-reflective and pre-theoretical. When 
I  take something, let us say a tool like a hammer, as ready-
to-hand, I  am  using it rather than reflecting on it. This usage 
is an embodied know-how rather than theoretical contemplation. 
Heidegger argued that the Western philosophical tradition 
focused exclusively on Vorhandenheit (“presence-at-hand”), that 
is, the theoretical comportment. For example, Kant’s theory 
of experience is explicitly aimed at supporting the endeavor 
of science. This focus on theoretical reason rather than embodied 
action is something we  can see reduplicated in the history of 
artificial intelligence and robotics. In contrast, Merleau-Ponty, 
1945/2012 examined embodiment and action as they dynamically 
interact with space, time, sexuality, other agents, and other 
domains. According to Merleau-Ponty, smooth coping is the 
most fundamental mode of our everyday lives. Years later, 
Hans Jonas (2001) developed a genetic phenomenology of 
subjectivity, according to which these basal strata of smooth 
coping enable higher-order cognitive processes to emerge, similar 
to contemporary claims of scaffolding. Across thinkers in the 
phenomenological tradition, we see an emphasis on embodiment 
in which smooth coping is a basic capacity of cognitive agents 
as they move through the world. In summary, many 
phenomenologists take the view that smooth coping forms 
the basic background of embodied human agency, and that 
more epistemically oriented, logical, or higher-order processes 
are less common and are founded against this background.
Building off of the phenomenological tradition, Dreyfus and 
Dreyfus (1980) developed a cognitive theory of smooth coping 
based on five stages of skill acquisition. According to their 
theory, expertise in a skill is characterized by automatization 
and a lack of higher-order thinking. On this model of smooth 
coping, experts have habituated their skills within a domain 
to the point that their movements are fully automatized. This, 
in turn, is supposed to explain why paying attention to oneself, 
or deploying higher-order cognitive processes, such as 
“strategizing,” can sometimes be  detrimental to performance 
(Fitts and Posner, 1967; Cappuccio et  al., 2019).
In the literature on smooth coping and expert performance, 
others have followed Dreyfus and Dreyfus and similarly argued 
that smooth coping in skillful action is a matter of complete 
automaticity (Papineau, 2013, 2015).
However, the Dreyfus model has in recent years been 
criticized by a variety of theorists, athletes, and artists, and 
from a variety of perspectives. For example, Barbara Gail 
Montero (2010, 2016) demonstrates that to be effective in many 
sports, the athlete must deploy both automatization and higher-
order cognitive processes. Additionally, Montero et  al. (2019) 
demonstrate that the empirical research program claiming that 
self-attention is detrimental to performance is based on flawed 
experimental design. Self-attention, monitoring, strategizing, 
and so forth, are often integrated into the flow of performance, 
rather than interrupting it.
The point here is that higher-order processes, such as 
planning, strategizing, monitoring, and so forth, are not always 
detrimental to expert performance, but on the contrary are 
often necessary for expert performance and successful smooth 
coping. Given this insight, smooth coping is often a matter 
of fluently integrating what some have called “online” (immediate 
sensory stimuli is needed) and “off-line” (detached from 
immediate sensory stimuli) cognition (Wilson, 2002). Several 
theories now propose an integrated web of causality between 
low-level and higher-order processes in expert performance 
and smooth coping more generally. Such models include “arch” 
(Høffding and Satne, 2019), meshed architecture (Christensen 
et  al., 2016, 2019), the dual-process model (Neemeh, 2021), 
radically meshed architecture (Gallagher and Varga, 2020), and 
a variety of similar approaches (Bermúdez, 2017; Pacherie and 
Mylopoulos, 2021).
While these models vary with regards to their commitments, 
the general gist is the same: both low-level and higher-order 
cognitive processes are utilized and impact each other during 
expert performance. For example, automatized non-conscious 
processes, such as the continual adjustment of posture or 
dribbling of a basketball, can be  impacted by higher-order 
conscious processes, such as thinking about and realizing the 
opponent’s strategy. A mixed martial arts fighter facing an 
opponent with a longer reach might strategically try to outsmart 
their opponent by trying to grapple rather than kicking and 
punching. Such a higher-order strategic decision in turn impacts 
how fighters adjust their postures and reconfigure their 
sensorimotor readiness toward certain action types.
In the literature on dance performance, some phenomenologists 
have similarly pointed out that even in highly choreographed 
performances in which one movement brings forth the 
next,  expert dancers must adjust their performances to the 
particularities of the stage, that night’s audience, lighting, air 
density and humidity, costume malfunctions, and other factors 
(Bresnahan, 2014). In this same vein, and perhaps even more 
importantly, the expert dancer (and expert performer in general) 
must always move in and out of conscious monitoring of the 
body itself, to adjust in accordance with how the body feels 
that day (Ravn, 2020).
From these brief examples, we  can see that embodied 
expertise, whether in mundane cases like walking or driving 
or in highly specialized domains, such as sports and performance, 
involves a fluent intermixing of various cognitive processes 
and different levels of awareness (conscious, never-conscious, 
pre-conscious, pre-reflective). While meshed architecture 
approaches differ on their commitments to concepts, such as 
“mental representation” or how to conceptualize the causation 
between different cognitive mechanisms, it is commonly agreed 
that smooth coping is not just a matter of automatization. 
Rather, we  frequently utilize and change between various 
cognitive processes. For example, musicians sometimes report 
being in a state of complete automatization while simultaneously 
monitoring their own actions and the actions of fellow musicians. 
In such a state the musician playing is acting through 
automatization but they are ready to interject with top-down 
control at any moment (Høffding, 2019).
Similarly important in discussions of smooth coping and 
expert performance is the notion of dispositional skill or habit. 
Here thinkers tend to develop accounts of habits that are 
strongly inspired by John Dewey’s (1922) notion of habit as 

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
4	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
a context-sensitive, flexible, disposition to act. Whether working 
within explicitly anti-representationalist enactive cognitive science 
(Gallagher, 2020; Segundo-Ortin and Heras-Escribano, 2021) 
or representationalist cognitive science (Schack, 2004; Sutton 
et al., 2011; Bermúdez, 2017; Pacherie and Mylopoulos, 2021), 
there is a general agreement that habit is an important concept 
in expert performance and smooth coping. Habits in such a 
view are entrenched through practice but are flexibly adapted 
to a variety of contexts. Unlike motor programs that are 
contextually rigid (Ghez, 1985; Neilson and Neilson, 2005), 
habits are always regulated and finely adjusted by the current 
context—habits are ways of adaptively being in one’s environment 
(Dewey, 1922).
THE LEARNING INTELLIGENT DECISION 
AGENT COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE
Learning intelligent decision agent is a systems-level cognitive 
architecture intended to provide a complete and integrated 
account of cognition (Franklin et  al., 2016). Thus, rather than 
modeling one aspect of mind, the LIDA model aims to be  a 
“unified theory of cognition” (Newell, 1994) capable of modeling 
human, animal, and artificial minds.1 Cognition, as it is used 
here, broadly encompasses every mechanism of mind including 
(but not limited to) perception, attention, motivation, planning, 
deliberation, metacognition, action selection, and motor control, 
as well as the embodiment of all of these activities. “Cognition” 
then is meant to cover the entirety of the agent’s mental life 
including its embodiment and embodied actions. Within the 
LIDA framework, “minds” are broadly conceived of as control 
structures for autonomous agents (Franklin, 1995; Franklin and 
Graesser, 1997). Here “control structures” (see Newell, 1973) 
are broadly conceived of as those mechanisms that allow an 
agent to pursue its agenda. To be  an autonomous agent is in 
part to have an agenda, and to have a mind is to have structures 
that allow one to pursue that agenda (however simple or 
complex one’s agenda might be). Consequently, autonomous 
agents are always in the business of answering the question 
“What should I  do next?”
Learning intelligent decision agent is composed of many 
short- and long-term memory modules, as well as special 
purpose processors called codelets. While modularity is 
sometimes seen as a “bad word” in contemporary philosophy 
of mind, the LIDA model is modular in the sense that it is 
composed of a collection of independent modules that are 
constantly performing their designated task. However, it is 
important to note that the LIDA model is not committed to 
the modularity of brains (Franklin et  al., 2013). In fact, the 
LIDA model makes no claims about brains whatsoever. Thus, 
the LIDA model can be  implemented even by brains that are 
dynamic and full of neural reuse (Kelso, 1995; Anderson, 2014).
Importantly, the LIDA model implements the Global 
Workspace Theory of consciousness (Baars, 1988, 2019). An 
1For an overview of other cognitive architectures see Kotseruba and Tsotsos (2016).
agent typically cannot be aware of everything in its environment 
(external or internal) and therefore needs to “filter out” the 
most relevant information. LIDA agents therefore have 
information regarding the world “compete” for its attention 
in a module known as the Global Workspace. Whatever structure 
wins (most typically a coalition of structures) is globally broadcast 
to every module throughout the model—hence the term “the 
global broadcast.” In this way, the Global Workspace functions 
as a filter that dictates what information becomes available to 
the rest of the agent’s modules.
In LIDA, sensory stimuli are used to construct both a rich 
model of the external environment and an internal environment 
within the module known as the Current Situational Model 
(CSM). In broad strokes, the CSM creates a model of the 
world, and different parts of the model are then sent to compete 
in the Global Workspace.
The LIDA model utilizes two types of special purpose 
processors—structure building codelets and attention codelets. 
Structure 
building 
codelets 
build, 
potentially 
complex, 
representational structures in LIDA’s CSM. These structures 
can include, among other things, sensory content from an 
agent’s environment and cued long-term memories (e.g., from 
Perceptual Associative Memory, Spatial Memory, Transient 
Episodic Memory, and Declarative Memory). Attention codelets, 
on the other hand, continually monitor the CSM looking for 
structures that match their concerns. If found, pre-conscious 
content and its corresponding attention codelets are formed 
into coalitions that compete for consciousness in LIDA’s 
Global Workspace.
Coalitions consist of attention codelets and the contents 
for which they advocate. These coalitions are then sent to 
compete within the Global Workspace for conscious “attention.” 
The competition taking place within the Global Workspace 
module decides to what the system will consciously attend. 
Whichever coalition has the highest activation has its content 
broadcast to every LIDA module across the model (i.e., its 
content is globally broadcast). Consciousness consists of, among 
other things, the frequent serialized broadcast of discrete 
cognitive moments unfolding across overlapping cycles, that 
is then typically processed by each module. In other words. 
Consciousness is discrete and one thing after the other occurs 
at rapid pace (Baars, 1988). While all of LIDA’s modules take 
in input asynchronously, the serialized nature of the global 
broadcast 
facilitates 
a 
smooth 
serialized 
unfolding 
of 
consciousness and, as we  shall see, of embodied action. For 
a general overview of the LIDA model, its modules, and 
processes, see Figure  1.
To be  able to address the fact that agents have varying 
needs, across culture, personal history, and current situations, 
several variables are attached to structures in the CSM. For 
example, each structure has an activation value that is used 
in part to measure its salience. The salience of these structures 
is used to determine the activation of coalitions containing 
these structures, modulating their chance of winning the 
competition for global broadcasting in the Global Workspace. 
For an in-depth account of salience and motivation in LIDA 
(see McCall et  al., 2020).

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
5	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
One of the core commitments of the LIDA research program 
is that the LIDA model is an embodied architecture (Franklin 
et  al., 2013). This means that LIDA agents are biologically 
inspired in their design, and always in active commerce with 
their environments. In line with 4E approaches to cognition, 
LIDA agents are always in the process of answering the question 
“What do I  do next?” Furthermore, constantly answering this 
question means that all LIDA agents have an “agenda” and 
in many embodied LIDA agents the agenda stems from the 
demands of the agent’s body.
Debates within embodied cognition often distinguish between 
weak and strong embodiment (Gallagher, 2011). In rough terms, 
an approach to cognition is weakly embodied if the body 
tends to simply be  “represented” within a systems central 
processing. A system is strongly embodied if the arrangement 
of the systems physical body aids in the constitution of its 
cognition. However, the LIDA model does not neatly fit into 
this categorization. The LIDA model uses subsumption 
architecture (Brooks, 1991), and is in constant sensitive commerce 
with the environment through its dorsal stream. The LIDA 
dorsal stream, among other things, directly impact an agent’s 
physical involvement with its world. LIDA agent’s also have 
a body schema that constantly impacts the unfolding of 
sensorimotor action. At the same time, it is true that the 
LIDA model also represents its own body within the current 
situational model. Furthermore, the LIDA cognitive architecture 
is made so that it can be  implemented both in physical and 
non-physical agents, such as robots or software agents, 
respectively. Therefore, the LIDA model contains both elements 
of strong and weak embodiment, and in physical agents, both 
approaches tend to be  in play.
With this overview in hand, we are ready to dig into more 
detail regarding the LIDA cognitive cycle and action selection. 
Action selection is of special importance during smooth coping 
since successful smooth coping requires the skillful selection 
and execution of the right actions at the right time.
The Cognitive Cycle
Learning intelligent decision agent’s cognitive cycle is divided 
into an understanding phase, an attention phase, and an 
action and learning phase (see Figure  2). LIDA’s cognitive 
cycle begins with external and internal sensory input, and 
the construction and updating of structures (i.e., representations) 
in the Current Situational Model (CSM). Structures that attract 
the attention of an attention codelet are then brought to the 
Global Workspace in which they compete for consciousness. 
The winning structure is broadcast throughout the model, 
and the system may make a decision to act (internally or 
externally) through an action selection mechanism. Learning 
can also occur as the result of each conscious broadcast. 
While a detailed discussion of learning in LIDA is beyond 
the scope of this article, it suffices to say that a LIDA agent 
FIGURE 1  |  The LIDA model cognitive cycle overview diagram.

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
6	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
typically learns with each cognitive cycle (as a direct result 
of its conscious broadcast).
For readers new to LIDA, it is helpful to remember that 
each cognitive cycle is rapid, lasting only 200–500 ms in humans 
(Madl et  al., 2011), and that LIDA’s modules work largely 
asynchronously and independently of each other. As a result, 
cognitive cycles can “overlap.” For example, the “action and 
learning phase” from one cognitive cycle can occur concurrently 
with the “perception and understanding phase” of the next. 
Thus, while each cognitive cycle is conceptually divided into 
discrete, serial phases, it is rarely the case that an agent’s 
modules and processes are completely inactive.
Action Selection
During the action and learning phase of each cognitive cycle, 
LIDA’s Action Selection module will typically select behaviors 
that specify executable (internal or external) actions. This process 
of action selection is needed for many reasons. For example, 
it may be  the case that many behaviors can accomplish a task, 
although not all of them equally well. For example, a box might 
be  moved by carrying it, pushing it with one’s hands, scooting 
it with one’s foot, or even pushing it with one’s head while 
crawling on all fours. In these cases, Action Selection facilitates 
the selection of the most situationally relevant and reliable of 
these behaviors. Furthermore, at any given moment, agents may 
have multiple, competing desires and goals. Action Selection 
facilitates the selection of behaviors that are more likely to lead 
to the most desirable outcomes. Finally, Action Selection 
coordinates the parallel selection of non-conflicting behaviors. 
Historically, Action Selection chose one, and only one, behavior 
at a time. In this paper, we enhance the Action Selection module 
to include an Automatized Action Selection sub-module (see 
Section “Smooth Coping in LIDA”) that allows for the selection 
of multiple, non-conflicting behaviors in each action selection event.
Action Selection depends on LIDA’s Procedural Memory, a 
long-term memory module that determinates situationally 
relevant actions and their expected environmental consequences. 
In other words, Procedural Memory specifies what actions are 
available to take, and would happen if they were taken, while 
Action Selection determines what the agent will do given that 
knowledge (see Figure  3).
As conscious content is globally broadcast throughout all 
of LIDA’s modules, it is received by Procedural Memory, which 
uses the contents of the conscious broadcast to instantiate2 
schemes that are relevant to that conscious content. Instantiated 
schemes are referred to as behaviors, which are candidates for 
selection by LIDA’s Action Selection module.
Each scheme consists of a context (i.e., environmental 
situation), an action, and a result (i.e., that action’s expected 
environmental consequences). These can be specified at many 
different levels of abstraction and generality. Each scheme 
also contains a base-level activation, which serves as an estimate 
2Instantiation is a specification process. It takes data structures and makes 
them more concrete. For example, in perception, the “template” for a chair 
could be instantiated into a specific chair, for example, a chair that is currently 
in front of an agent.
FIGURE 2  |  The LIDA Cognitive Cycle Diagram color coded. Green modules are involved in the perception and understanding phase, pink modules in the attention 
phase, and grey modules are involved in the Action and learning phase.

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
7	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
of the likelihood that the scheme’s result will follow from 
its action when taken in a given context. For example, a 
generic “key turning scheme” might specify an action that 
corresponds to the bodily movements needed to turn a key, 
the context of being near a lock, and the expected result of 
that lock being unlocked. Each successful selection and 
execution of this scheme’s action (in the given context) will 
generally result in an increase in its base-level activation. 
Similarly, each failure will lead to a decrease in its base-level 
activation. If, as we  might expect, this “key turning scheme” 
generally succeeds, then it will eventually have a high base-
level activation. However, if its context were underspecified, 
for example if it did not limit “key turning” to when an 
agent is “near a lock,” then its action might be  taken in 
inappropriate situations, leading to an unreliable scheme that 
often fails inexplicably. This unreliability would manifest in 
the scheme having a low base-level activation.
At this juncture it would be  natural to ask, “Wait, is there 
a scheme for everything? Is there a coffee making scheme? 
A TV watching scheme? A CrossFit scheme?” First, we  must 
understand that many schemes are culturally specific. A LIDA 
agent that is implemented in a car factory floor robot does 
not need a “cool handshake” scheme. However, an agent that 
exists in a culture in which different handshakes are integral 
to cultural fluency likely has schemes for different culturally 
relevant greetings.
Second, we  must understand that complex actions are 
achievable through the execution of multiple simpler actions. 
For example, riding a bicycle consists of pedaling with both 
legs, steering, braking, scanning the environment, and much 
more. Historically in LIDA, the coordination of multiple actions 
into complex actions has been implemented as streams of 
schemes (see section “Behavior Streams and Skill”). As a result 
of these streams, LIDA agents do not need to learn unique 
schemes for every complex action. Rather, seemingly novel 
complex actions can be manifested through multiple preexisting 
schemes. In this way, LIDA achieves a form of “transfer learning” 
(Pan and Yang, 2009). To further facilitate the learning of 
complex actions, in this paper, we  introduce the hierarchical 
organization of schemes (see section “Smooth Coping in LIDA”), 
which in conjunction with the automatized action selection 
of actions allows for fluid agential behavior.
When Action Selection chooses a behavior that specifies 
an external action (that is, one intended to modify an agent’s 
external environment), it passes it to LIDA’s Sensory Motor 
Memory for execution. If, on the other hand, the chosen 
behavior specifies an internal action (for example, one used 
to support mental simulation), it is sent to (or used to spawn) 
a structure building codelet that updates the Current Situational 
Model accordingly.
The selection of a behavior can also result in the creation 
of an expectation codelet. Expectation codelets are a type of 
FIGURE 3  |  To gain a better grasp of the action selection process in LIDA, it is helpful to think of the process as a funneling toward specificity. Procedural memory 
contains information about things the agent can do under various circumstances at a somewhat abstract level. Action Selection, broadly speaking, chooses “what 
to do” in the agent’s particular circumstance. Sensory Motor Memory decides “how to do it” be picking a motor plan, high specificity, and Motor Plan Execution 
carries out the motor plan. In this way, actions are procedurally selected with increasing specificity.

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
8	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
attention codelet tasked with monitoring the Current Situational 
Model for content that matches the expected results of the 
agent’s recently selected behaviors. This temporarily biases 
an agent’s attention toward the environmental consequences 
of its recent actions, helping to produce a feedback loop 
between an agent’s actions and their results. Thus, in line 
with enactive and predictive approaches to cognition, action, 
perception, and prediction are intimately tied together in a 
feedback loop.
Research on smooth coping generally agrees that smooth 
coping consists of a series of automatic and consciously controlled 
actions, as well as both low-level sensorimotor activity and 
higher-order thought, such as strategizing or monitoring 
(Christensen et  al., 2016; Montero, 2016; Høffding, 2019; 
Gallagher and Varga, 2020). In other words, smooth coping 
is a combination of ingrained and automatic processes with 
conscious and deliberate processes resulting in fluent and skillful 
action. In LIDA, this is modeled through the combination of 
four different modes of action selection: consciously mediated 
action selection, volitional decision making, alarms, and 
automatized action selection (Franklin et al., 2016, pp. 29–32).
Consciously mediated action selection refers to the many 
actions an agent performs in which the conscious broadcast 
is involved, while simultaneously being unaware of the selection 
processes that go into choosing those actions. For example, 
in sailing, the sports sailor might be  consciously aware of the 
different ropes on the mast but is not aware of the competition 
in Action Selection that makes her choose the particular rope 
grip she ends up deploying. Similarly, a tennis player might 
be  consciously aware of the ball as it approaches but is not 
aware of the action selection process that make him choose 
the smash over the volley.
Volitional action selection refers to the type of action selection 
in which the agent is consciously and actively aware of some 
of the selection processes. For example, when an agent is 
deliberating about what is the best move to make in a board 
game, and mulling over the different choices, outcomes, and 
pitfalls, they are doing volitional action selection. By mulling 
over different possible actions and their outcomes, “options” 
are created in the Current Situational Model (Franklin et  al., 
2016). Such options can become conscious and make their 
way to Procedural Memory, which may then instantiate behaviors 
based on these options. Action Selection may then choose 
from among these behaviors. Hence, the first part of volitional 
action selection is conscious while the second part is unconscious 
(the conscious broadcast is being utilized but the agent is not 
aware of the process taking place in Action Selection). In fact, 
in no mode of action selection is an agent aware of what is 
happening within the Action Selection module—the module 
just continuously does its job. In short, during volitional action 
selection, the agent is aware of the options they are juggling 
but not aware of what is going on “inside” Action Selection.
Alarms are never-conscious processes that bypass the competition 
in the Global Workspace. If some object or event is recognized 
by Perceptual Associative Memory as an alarm, the object or 
event will be  sent straight to Procedural Memory to instantiate 
schemes. Behaviors relevant to alarm content are assigned a high 
activation value in Action Selection and are typically selected 
and immediately passed along to Sensory Motor Memory—which 
in turn passes along motor plans to Motor Plan Execution. Put 
simply, many agents have experienced acting in an alarming 
situation, and only becoming aware of their actions after the 
fact. For example, having a big spider climb on one’s arm for a 
lot of people will result in a series of brushing, jumping, and 
spasms, in which they are only aware of the threat after the fact. 
Similarly, in driving, many drivers experience reacting to dangerous 
situations as fast or faster than they are consciously aware of the 
situation. Note here that alarms can be  both innate as in the 
spider example or culturally determined as in the driving example.
The final mode of Action Selection is automatized action 
selection. Automatized actions are overlearned actions where one 
action can be thought of as calling the next. Selection of automatized 
actions proceeds unconsciously, that is, selection does not necessarily 
need content from the conscious broadcast. These are typically 
the kinds of actions that have been practiced time and time 
again, and they can be  performed without conscious thought. 
For example, walking on an empty sidewalk is a typical automatized 
action. It requires little attention, and the agent can simultaneously 
focus on other matters. In this paper, we go into detail regarding 
automatized action selection in Section “Smooth Coping in LIDA.”
While we go into details regarding automatization in section 
“Smooth Coping in LIDA” it is worth noting here a core 
difference between automatized action selection and alarms. 
Alarm actions revert back to normal functioning once the 
alarm action has been executed and does not call for further 
actions. In this way, alarms are a temporary interruption of 
whatever the agent is doing. Automatized actions on the other 
hand do not interrupt or take priority over normal processes 
in the system. Furthermore, automatized actions specify which 
actions are to proceed them from within the Automatized 
Action Selection module (more on this in section “Smooth 
Coping in LIDA”).
While in humans this whole process, starting with Procedural 
Memory, Action Selection, Sensory Motor Memory, and finally 
Motor Plan Execution, might seem long and laborious, it is 
important to remember that this process is extremely rapid. 
Each cognitive cycle typically happens within a few hundred 
milliseconds (Madl et  al., 2011). Thus, when dealing with fast 
paced dynamic action, as is often the case in smooth coping, 
the overlapping cognitive cycles are more than sufficiently 
speedy to make adjustments and act on the fly. Furthermore, 
we  must remember that Motor Plan Execution operates in 
parallel with all other systems, allowing for non-conscious 
adjustments to in-flight motor plans. Additionally, the LIDA 
Sensory Motor System is based on Brooks’s subsumption 
architecture (Brooks, 1991), allowing for rapid agent world 
interaction.
Similarly, to enactive and predictive processing approaches 
to mind, LIDA agents are always in the process of adaptively 
acting; We can say that LIDA agents are perpetually answering 
the question “What should I do next?” In LIDA, Action Selection 
continually chooses a behavior among candidate behaviors and 
sends them to Sensory Motor Memory (unless the action is 
to deliberate). This ensures that the agent is always in the 

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
9	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
process of acting to stay in an optimal adaptive relationship 
to its environment.
Behavior Streams and Skill
Smooth coping involves “skill” and “optimal grip.” To have an 
optimal grip on an activity is to skillfully navigate that activity 
with fluency and ease (Merleau-Ponty, 1945/2012; Rietveld and 
Kiverstein, 2014; Bruineberg et  al., 2021). Concepts, such as 
“skill” and “fluency,” often include being able to execute several 
actions in an uninterrupted fashion and adjusting those chains 
of movements to the dynamical real-time changes and demands 
of the situation (Nakamura and Csikszentmihalyi, 2014).
In LIDA, skill and fluency are, in part, implemented via 
behavior streams. Besides individual schemes, Procedural Memory 
also contains streams of schemes that can be  instantiated. A 
stream of schemes is a stringed-together series of action schemes 
that can be  collectively instantiated using contents from one 
or more global broadcasts. The entire instantiated stream of 
schemes is known as a behavior stream. Once a behavior 
stream has been sent to Action Selection the module can 
rapidly select one behavior at a time and pass each of these 
behaviors on to Sensory Motor Memory (which in turn passes 
on motor plans to Motor Plan Execution).
For biological agents smooth coping often involves a series 
of fluent actions. For example, dribbling a basketball, taking 
three long strides, and then jumping for the slam dunk can 
occur as one integrated, fluent series of movements. Furthermore, 
people rarely do just one thing at a time. The action selection 
process in LIDA, therefore, often involves Action Selection, 
rapidly picking behaviors from several behavior streams.
Historically, in the LIDA conceptual model, Action Selection 
has always picked one, and only one, action at the time. 
However, in biological agents, physical actions frequently overlap. 
Therefore, in this paper we are enhancing LIDA’s Action Selection 
to support the simultaneous selection of multiple actions. 
Specifically, in addition to the selection of actions one after 
another by our original action selection algorithm, we are also 
supporting the simultaneous selection of automatized actions. 
This is achieved by Action Selection’s new Automatized Action 
Selection sub-module. Developing this sub-module is one of 
the contributions of this paper.
For example, one can imagine the (haunting) scene of a 
circus clown riding a unicycle, juggling, and deliberately, 
maniacally laughing while performatively grinning its teeth. 
Such a performance requires multiple skilled actions overlapping 
at once. Even though Action Selection is constrained to choose 
only one behavior at a time, this does not mean that the 
execution of previously selected behaviors must be  sequential. 
Furthermore, Action Selection can rapidly choose behaviors 
from multiple concurrent behavior streams, and pass them 
forward to Sensory Motor Memory for execution.
To be a skilled agent at some activity involves (among other 
things) having finely tuned, well-rehearsed behavior streams 
and motor plan templates that can be  flexibly adjusted to the 
demands of the present situation. In LIDA, much of the “skilled” 
aspects of smooth coping is handled by Action Selection, 
Sensory Motor Memory, and especially Motor Plan Execution.
As a behavior is sent to Sensory Motor Memory, the system 
must create a motor plan—a highly concrete plan of bodily 
movement. Motor plans specify sequences of specific movement 
commands (the motor commands) that direct each of the 
agent’s specific actuators. Here an actuator simply means one 
of the physical parts through which an agent acts on the 
world. For example, a factory robot might only possess a single 
“arm” actuator. Human beings, on the other hand, have a 
great many more actuators.
Motor plans and their motor commands react and adapt 
to rapid incoming data from Sensory Memory through a dorsal 
stream (Neemeh et  al., 2021) to guarantee that the agent’s 
actions are in synch with the most current state of 
the environment.
Often in smooth coping, an environment may change as 
an agent is acting on it. For example, being a sports sailor 
involves skillfully maneuvering the sails of a boat as the vessel 
is being bumped and rocked by erratic winds and currents. 
To skillfully complete motor plans during such dynamic situations 
motor plans constantly react to sensory information through 
LIDA’s dorsal stream as the agent is acting. An agent sailing 
might issue a motor plan to reach for a specific rope. However, 
as they are reaching the boat is rocked by a large wave. Instead 
of continuing the reach in the same fashion, updating the 
motor plan in real time through the dorsal stream ensures 
that the agent adjusts their reach, and still successfully grasps 
the rope.
Affordances, Action-Oriented 
Representations, and Behavior Streams
Recent research on smooth coping cashes out much of the 
skillful interaction loop between agent and environment in 
terms 
of 
affordances 
and 
sometimes 
action-oriented 
representations (Milikan, 1995; Clark, 2016; Williams, 2018; 
Gallagher, 2020; Bruineberg et  al., 2021; Kronsted, 2021a). 
Affordances and action-oriented representations are two very 
similar concepts. Affordances are typically defined as possibilities 
for actions that exist as a relation between an enculturated 
agent and the environment (Gibson, 1979/2013; Chemero, 2009). 
Significantly, affordances are ordinarily thought of as a 
non-representational concept. Action-oriented representations 
are very similar—but as implied in the name, they are a class 
of mental representations. Action-oriented representations are 
representations that also beckon or move the agent into action 
(Milikan, 1995; Ramsey, 2007; Clark, 2016; Kirchhoff and 
Kiverstein, 2019).
In LIDA we  take a middle-ground approach by using 
representational affordances. LIDA affordances are conceptualized 
as representations within the system. For a recent account of 
how LIDA agents learn and use affordances (see Neemeh et al., 
2021). Here it will suffice to say that as LIDA agents become 
enculturated and trained in various activities, they learn to 
perceive new affordances upon which they can react. As a 
LIDA agent gains increased skill, their perceptual system can 
detect increasingly more fine-grained affordances that can factor 
into the selection of increasingly fine-grained behavior streams.

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
10	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
There is a careful relationship between action, learning, 
behavior streams, and affordances. One of the aspects of LIDA 
that make the model stand out from other cognitive architectures 
is the “L”—Learning. LIDA agents technically speaking can 
“learn” something new with every cognitive cycle. With each 
global broadcast, almost all modules can be  updated with 
content from the broadcast, and each module (including the 
various memory modules) can perform some function in light 
of that broadcast. For example, Perceptual Associative Memory 
might build new connections, Transient Episodic Memory might 
put together a new event, the Conscious Content Queue adds 
to the specious present, perhaps Procedural Memory starts 
building a new scheme, and much more. For a detailed account 
of learning in LIDA (see Kugele and Franklin, 2021).
In terms of smooth coping, as a LIDA agent acts upon 
its environment, with each broadcast the agent slowly becomes 
more familiarized with that environment and the relevant 
task at hand. Such adaptation includes building more specialized 
and fine-grained affordances and behavior schemes for those 
affordances. For example, an agent might not know a thing 
about Brazilian Jujitsu, but with training, the different 
movements of opponents become associated with affordances 
for action or counter action (Kimmel and Rogler, 2018). An 
opponent going for the rear neck choke—affords putting one’s 
back flat on the mat. An opponent putting their weight in 
the wrong spot during close guard affords performing a leg 
triangle choke. There is a virtuous cycle between affordances 
and their associated behavior schemes. Smooth coping is most 
often a matter of having fine-grained affordances that make 
available the use of appropriately fine-grained behavior schemes 
(see Figure  4).
As agents perceives an event, they also perceive the associated 
affordances. If a coalition containing affordances wins the 
competition for broadcast in the Global Workspace, then the 
presence of the affordance in the broadcasted content will 
help instantiate behavior schemes, and thereby also promote 
winning the competition in Action Selection.
As mentioned earlier, choosing a behavior (perhaps from 
a behavior stream) also creates an expectation codelet to facilitate 
the monitoring of behavior-related outcomes. The creation of 
expectation codelets not only help bringing action outcomes 
to consciousness, but also helps ensure that the affordances 
associated with those action outcomes are also broadcast 
consciously. Acting on one affordance brings about the next 
affordance in an action promoting feedback loop. Such a 
feedback loop is in line with empirical and theoretical literature 
on affordances that conceptualizes smooth coping as a feedback 
loop between action and affordances (Di Paolo et  al., 2018; 
Kimmel and Rogler, 2018; de Oliveira et  al., 2021; Kimmel 
and Hristova, 2021; Kronsted, 2021b).
Overall, we see that smooth coping is not a matter of already 
being skilled at an activity. Rather smooth coping involves the 
ability to continually improve one’s skill and adaptivity. In 
LIDA, this adaptiveness is built into the flow of information 
across modules, facilitated by the conscious broadcast.
Of course, smooth coping is not only about knowing 
“what to do,” but also about having sufficiently developed 
sensorimotor coordination to do so—in layman’s terms having 
the right motor skills. Therefore, the skill cycle in LIDA 
also includes the agent building and refining increasingly 
sophisticated motor plan templates. Over many cognitive 
cycles, Sensory Motor Memory is slowly updated so that 
the agent is (hopefully) always in a position to know “how 
to do it” and with a great level of sophistication. Going 
into detail on how Sensory Motor Memory builds and updates 
motor plans is outside the scope of this paper. The important 
takeaway is that LIDA agents consistently update their action 
capabilities by updating their schemes for “what to do” 
(behaviors) and their plans for “how to do it” (motor 
plan templates).
Let us take the example of becoming better at sports—in 
this case, soccer. Through practice, soccer players learn to 
perceive the field and see it in terms of different opportunities. 
That is, the player, over time, learns to experience the game 
in terms of different affordances “in this situation, I  can do 
a long pass, dribble past this guy on the right, or do a short 
backward pass.” Over time, players learn to see the field in 
terms of affordances that provide possibilities for “what to do” 
(potential behaviors). However, learning to exploit affordances 
is also a matter of learning how to concretely utilize the 
affordance “how to do it” (motor plans). With practice, agents 
therefore also fine-tune their physical capabilities in part by 
developing increasingly sophisticated motor plan templates—in 
the beginning, dribbling and kicking is clumsy, but over time 
it becomes second nature.
Naturally, doing something as advanced as expert level soccer 
requires multiple processes—some consciously mediated, others 
automatic. Hence, next, we  will look at how different modes 
of action selection are interwoven during smooth coping, and 
the role of automatized action.
AUTOMATIZATION AND THE 
AUTOMATIZED ACTION SELECTION 
SUB-MODULE
One crucial aspect of smooth coping is that it involves both 
higher-level and lower-level cognitive processes (Christensen 
et al., 2016; Montero, 2016; Høffding and Satne, 2019; Gallagher 
and Varga, 2020). Let us return to the clown example. The 
clown performer who is simultaneously riding a unicycle, 
juggling, grinning, and talking to select audience members 
may utilize both consciously mediated, fully conscious, and 
automatized actions. Thus, to account for such overlapping in 
action during smooth coping, we  need to take a look at how 
LIDA agents achieve automatization.
An automatized action is implemented as a series of behaviors 
in a behavior stream that have been mastered to the point in 
which those behaviors can be selected without mediation from 
the conscious broadcast—that is automatized behaviors can 
be  selected without the need for sensory input updating. 
However, the execution of these behaviors may often require 
sensory input (for example over the dorsal stream or even 
the conscious broadcast).

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
11	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
For the purposes of smooth coping, it is often important 
that agents can do several actions simultaneously (for example, 
pedal and pass, dribble and tackle, punch and block, and the 
list goes on). In this paper, we  therefore introduce a new 
sub-module to the LIDA model, namely, Action Selection’s 
Automatized Action Selection sub-module (AAS). This 
sub-module runs in parallel with Action Selection, and repeatedly 
sends behaviors to Sensory Motor Memory (SMM). For example, 
in our unicycling clown example, Automatized Action Selection 
can repeatedly choose the automatized behavior “pedal” and 
send it to SMM.
Having a sub-module that deals entirely with automatized 
behaviors, and being able to repeatedly select such behaviors, 
allows for Action Selection to focus in parallel on other 
forms of action selection, such as consciously mediated action 
selection or deliberation. Let us return to the example of Jiu 
Jitsu and the triangle choke. The “triangle choke” is a high-
level behavior that consists of several movements (see Figure 5): 
leg hook, triangle hook, arm hook, and the squeeze. When 
Action Selection selects that high-level behavior, it sends that 
behavior to the AAS sub-module. From there AAS can select 
from the component behaviors in the “triangle choke’s” behavior 
stream. In short, Action Selection passes on high-level 
automatized behaviors to AAS, which then selects from lower-
level component behaviors in the high-level behavior’s behavior 
stream. Being able to choose actions in parallel, allows for 
the Jiu Jitsu practitioner to carefully read their opponent’s 
patterns, and deliberate about what to do next while 
simultaneously producing complex behaviors, such as the 
“triangle choke” (Figures 6, 7). Smooth coping is often achieved 
by having Automatized Action Selection working harmoniously 
in parallel with other forms of action selection.
Automatized Action Selection runs in parallel with Action 
Selection choosing behaviors from automatized behavior streams 
(for example, walking, pedaling, dribbling, playing an ingrained 
song, etc.). Each of the behaviors from the selected behavior 
stream can be  thought of as “calling the next” behavior in 
that stream. So once a high-level automatized behavior is 
selected, each of its lower-level behaviors, metaphorically 
speaking, gets to choose what behavior comes next. For example, 
if an agent is playing an overlearned piano piece (say Alley 
Cat by Bent Fabric) by way of Automatized Action Selection, 
each note, which corresponds to a lower-level behavior, “calls 
the next.” Once the first note has been chosen from the “Alley 
Cat Automatized behavior stream,” the first note selects the 
next note upon its completion. This produces the sensation 
recognized by many musicians as the piece essentially playing 
itself. This kind of automatization of one action calling the 
next also ensures that the musician can sing at the same time, 
lock eyes with the audience, playfully shimmy their shoulders, 
etc. all at the same time.
In LIDA technical terms, automatized behaviors are “degenerate” 
behavior streams—they are overlearned actions that do not include 
branching options. The lack of branching options is what allows 
FIGURE 4  |  Procedural Memory contains streams of specialized behaviors. For example, to perform the Triangle Choke from Brazilian jiu jitsu the agent must first 
hook their leg around the opponent, form a leg triangle, and then tighten the triangle with legs and arm. These separate behaviors can be executed fluently by 
having each action linked together in a behavior stream that can have its variables specified with data from the conscious broadcast. By learning actions that are 
chained together, agents can execute highly specialized behaviors.

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
12	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
FIGURE 5  |  Above are three of the virtuous cycles in LIDA agent smooth coping. The first cycle demonstrates the affordance action cycle step by step. The second 
cycle demonstrates the relationship between expectation codelets new affordances and action. As an agent acts, they also generate expectation codelets and such 
codelets increases the chance of action-related affordances winning the competition for consciousness. Such biasing of attention in turn creates more actions. 
Finally, the skill cycle demonstrates how affordances lead to the creation of appropriate behavior schemes and executing behaviors in turn leads to the perception of 
new affordances.
FIGURE 6  |  Here, we are zooming into Action Selection. In this case, Action Selection is choosing between a wealth of candidate behaviors. In this case, Action 
Selection chooses the “triangle choke” and passes it on to the Automatized Action Selection sub-module. Action Selection and the Automatized Action Selection 
sub-module run in parallel to facilitate multitasking. In this case, the agent is choosing to perform a Triangle choke while simultaneously choosing to “deliberate” on 
what to do next.

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
13	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
the behavior to directly “call the next.” An automatized high-
level behavior for pedaling may contain a behavior for pedaling 
with the right leg that then calls a behavior for pedal with the 
left leg—there are no branching options.
Importantly, 
automatized 
behavior 
streams 
can 
also 
be hierarchically structured where each of the behaviors in these 
streams can correspond to other behavior streams. This capability 
is critical because the specification of many actions benefits 
from hierarchical structure, and the reuse of these higher-level 
behaviors can be more efficient in memory. High-level behaviors 
often contain multiple behavior streams that must “line-up.” 
For example, to build a Reuben sandwich requires getting bread, 
mayo, sauerkraut, corned beef, and Swiss cheese, assembling 
the components, and putting them on a plate. Each of these 
sub-actions can be  automatized and part of its own behavior 
stream. Collectively, these automatized behaviors contribute to 
realization of the high-level “Reuben sandwich” behavior.
A deli worker might make and wrap a sandwich like usual 
without taking the costumer’s difficult special order into 
account “only a little mayo, extra pickles, add sardines!” 
Making the sandwich differently requires consciously mediated 
action selection rather than automatization with one action 
calling the next. This explains why sometimes even when 
clearly intending to do one thing agents end up doing another 
because the beginning of the action was of an automatized 
nature.
It is important to note that although automatized behaviors 
do not have branching options and call the next action, they 
still generate expectation codelets. Just as with all other actions 
in LIDA, the generation of expectation codelets allow the 
system to keep track of the fulfilment of its actions so that 
the system may know whether to continue with its behaviors 
or switch to other behaviors.
As Automatic Action Selection feeds automatized behaviors 
forward to Sensory Motor Memory, that module can instantiate 
motor plans that also indicate the “timing” for how long the 
automatized action needs to be executed for—thereby mitigating 
the risk of doing something “mindlessly” for too long. In the 
music example, the motor plans for each note are designated 
a very short and precise timing. A motor plan for automatized 
“walking” on the other hand can have the temporal designation 
“until further notice” within the motor plan. We must remember 
that while automatization is often good for expert performance, 
smooth coping involves interwoven types of actions. Relying 
too much on automatization will often cause the task to fail.
SMOOTH COPING IN LIDA
One way to describe smooth coping is the use of automatization 
with intermittent use of consciously mediated actions (see Figure 8) 
as well as other overlapping action selection types toward the 
FIGURE 7  |  The Automatized Action Selection sub-module rapidly chooses one behavior at the time from candidate automatized behaviors (much like regular 
Action Selection). Like pearls on a string these behaviors are sent forward to Sensory Motor Memory at high speed; all in parallel with whatever might be happening 
in Action Selection. Differently from regular Action Selection selected automatized behaviors also “calls” for the next action to be selected to insure rapid smooth 
unfolding of the overlearned series of behaviors.

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
14	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
fulfillment of an intention (Kronsted et  al., 2021). The agent is 
not simply multitasking or simply just doing automatization. 
Rather, all or most of the agent’s cognitive processes are cohering 
toward fulfilling one intention (completing this difficult recipe, 
football maneuvers, making it to work through traffic).
If some event forces the agent to abandon the cohering 
of their actions toward the intention the smooth coping process 
is interrupted. For example, the unicycling clown is engaging 
in smooth coping—cycling, juggling, grinning, and singing, 
all toward the intention of completing their act with a 
mesmerized audience. However, if a stagehand suddenly runs 
onto the stage and yells, “You must come at once, your wife 
is giving birth,” then the agent’s actions are no longer directed 
at the distal intention of finishing the act. Smooth coping 
has been interrupted. Less dramatically, if the phone rings 
while an agent is cooking, if the agent picks up the phone 
and attends to the phone call rather than the stove, smooth 
coping has been temporarily interrupted. The processes can, 
of course, be  re-engaged as soon as the agent puts the phone 
down. In contrast, if the agent where to continue cooking 
while talking on the phone the agent can still be  said to 
be  smooth coping.
While we have here focused mostly on perception and action 
selection, and not memory processes, Smooth coping in LIDA 
is a phenomenon that operates across all modules. As mentioned 
previously in this paper we  here introduce a new addition to 
the LIDA cognitive architecture—the Automatized Action 
Selection sub-module. In this section, we briefly go into more 
detail regarding the different modes of action selection, and 
then describe their interwoven nature during smooth coping 
especially in relation to the Automatized Action Selection 
sub-module. Finally, we  provide three concrete case studies to 
demonstrate how the entire theoretical framework might play 
out (see section “Conclusion”).
Interwoven Action Selection, and 
Feedback Loops
We can now see how action selection during smooth coping 
is achieved in LIDA agents through the interweaving of action 
selection types—consciously mediated action selection, volitional 
action selection, alarms, and automatized action selection.
As agents act in a variety of dynamically changing situations, 
they must deploy different forms of action selection to adaptively 
achieve their goals. For example, an agent might deploy a 
series of behaviors and behavior streams to carefully operate 
a table saw to carve pieces of wood in the right dimensions. 
Such behaviors and behavior streams might include walking 
to the table saw, grasping the wood, carefully lining it up on 
the table, and sliding the wood forward onto the saw while 
taking aim to ensure a straight-line cut. As the agent is deploying 
these behavior streams, they might also have intermittent 
moments of deliberation in which they actively think about 
which pieces to cut first and how to stack them up in the 
FIGURE 8  |  Here, we see an example of how an instance of smooth coping could unfold in a LIDA agent. The clown initiates automized actions, such as biking, 
juggling, and perhaps singing. In this case, the clown starts by biking, then overlays juggling, and finally starts singing (three concurrent automatized behaviors). 
Intermixed with these automized actions are behaviors picked out from a behavior stream and single behaviors. For example, the clown can turn its head toward 
select audience members and do a terrifying grin, perhaps do a spin on the bike or in the case of the single behavior that stops all other actions—do a backflip on 
the bike to then continue the routine.

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
15	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
right order. The agent might further deliberate about the right 
dimensions of the cuts, which in turn will trickle down and 
affect the specifics of the instantiated motor plans and the 
execution of the actions in Motor Plan Execution.
Since the agent in our example is very skilled at carpentry, 
they have over years of practice developed automatized behavior 
streams and highly sophisticated motor plan templates for 
operating a table saw. So, the agent can operate the saw mostly 
through Automatized Action Selection.
Perhaps as the agent is working the table saw, their finger 
gets alarmingly close to the blade, and an alarm is triggered 
in the system pulling the hand backward. Alarms are importantly 
a part of the smooth coping flow when they enable the agent 
to continue with the intended activity. So, in the table saw 
example, the alarm that stops the agent from cutting off a 
finger naturally allows for the agent to continue the activity. 
However, an alarm to shake a large spider off one’s hand 
does not perpetuate the intended activity, and will typically 
break the smooth coping. The reason to bring up alarms 
here is to underscore that alarms usually must be  learned, 
and are often skill and context-specific. For example, outside 
the context of Brazilian Jiu jitsu, getting a nice underhook 
hug is sweet and comforting. However, within the context 
of Jiu Jitsu it means the practitioner is about to be  swept 
and likely lose the match. Hence, a context-specific alarm is 
likely triggered that will make the practitioner pull their arm 
back and try to close their armpits (to deny the opponent 
the underhook). Alarms are often an integrated part of 
mastering a skill since they are rapid and bypass the competition 
for conscious broadcasting.
Let us return to our table saw example. At some point 
over years of practice working the table saw has become 
automatized; the choosing of wood pieces, readying them at 
the table, and performing the cuts are now done by automatized 
behavior streams in which one action calls the next. In this 
way, the agent can repeatedly choose the same reliable behavior 
streams again and again until the job is done. Automatization 
allows for the selection of other actions (commonly, consciously 
mediated or deliberative actions) in parallel with the automatized 
action unfolding. The worker can operate the table saw (thanks 
to the Automatized Action Selection sub-module) while yelling 
at his/her apprentice to correct their form, bring them coffee, 
or perhaps deliberate about which technique to use for a 
difficult piece of wood that requires a different technique.
The overarching point is that smooth coping in LIDA involves 
deploying various forms of action selection each aimed at the 
task at hand. Be  it alarms, consciously mediated actions, 
deliberative actions, or purely automated actions, each behavior 
selected coheres toward completing the agent’s goal in an 
adaptive fashion.
At this juncture, we  cannot forget that smooth coping 
involves multiple feedback loops between the agent’s actions 
and changes in the environment. For example, driving behind 
a car while trying to read a funny bumper sticker on the car, 
involves having to be  at the right range of distances to that 
car. Too far away and one cannot read the sticker, too close 
and the cars may collide—the agent must maintain “optimal 
grip” (Merleau-Ponty, 1945/2012; Dreyfus and Wrathall, 2014; 
Bruineberg et  al., 2021). As already discussed, rapid dorsal 
stream updating of sensory information in movements updates 
Motor Plan Execution in action so that the agent can stay in 
an optimal relationship to their environment during action. 
There is a constant feedback loop between a LIDA agent’s 
actions and dorsal stream information.
Furthermore, with each action, an expectation codelet is 
also generated. As mentioned earlier, such codelets scan the 
Current Situational Model for objects and events related to 
the expected outcome of the agent’s actions. Structures brought 
to the Global Workspace by expectation codelets are typically 
highly salient and are very likely to win the competition for 
conscious broadcast. In this fashion, there is a feedback loop 
between an agent’s actions and their expectations. Through 
the feedback loop between actions and high activation results, 
LIDA agents can stay in careful attunement with the unfolding 
of their activities in dynamic contexts. We  see that coinciding 
with an agent’s actions is attention toward the results of those 
actions which in turn help determine the completion of the 
intended activity. This is a biasing of attention toward the 
results of one’s actions which in turn helps perpetuate the 
completion of the intended activity.
Finally, the cognitive cycle in general assists in increasing 
adaptivity through learning. LIDA agents can update their 
memory modules with every cognitive cycle (Kugele and 
Franklin, 2021). In this way, the agent is always slowly but 
surely moving itself toward a greater degree of adaptivity.
In general, we  can think of at least three feedback loops 
that aid LIDA agents in smooth coping—the general cognitive 
cycle (adaptivity on a distal time scale), the action attention 
loop (adaptivity on a proximal time scale), and the action 
dorsal stream loop (motor adaptivity on a rapid timescale). 
In short, the cognitive cycle helps with task adaptivity over 
longer periods of time. Consciously mediated action selection 
aids in adaptivity in the agent’s current context. Automatization, 
motor plans, and the dorsal stream takes care of rapid in the 
moment adaptivity (see Figure  9).
We have looked at different forms of action selection and 
how they are interwoven toward the completion of a task 
during smooth coping. We  have also looked at the different 
feedback loops that comes with these various forms of action 
selection, and how these feedback loops help the agent adapt 
to the task across different time scales.
DISCUSSION
For our discussion, we  will apply everything we  have looked 
at so far in three small case studies to see how smooth coping 
might play out in a LIDA agent in each scenario. We  start 
with the relatively simple example of walking, and move up 
in complexity to driving, and then short-order cooking.
Solo Walking
Sam wakes up at 5:00 am to take a daily walk in Shelby Farms 
Park. The path is a mile loop around a lake, and the early 

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
16	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
hour means that very few others are walking around at the 
same time.
Sam’s system utilizes the automatized behavior stream of 
walking. As the path curves ever so slightly around the lake, 
Sensory Memory updates Sam’s Motor Plans and motor 
commands so that Sam adjusts the direction of his body, the 
height and length of each step and other minor adjustments 
needed to move through the very accessible flat terrain. Minor 
differences in the height of the pavement mean that sometimes 
Sam’s Sensory Memory must update his stepping motor 
commands to be  a little longer and a little higher.
Being mostly a matter of automatization, Sam can let his 
mind wander and think actively about other things in his life 
that need pondering (should I  hop on the Bitcoin craze, is 
Squid Game really that good, what am  I  doing with my life?). 
Given that there are no obstacles in the terrain, Sam’s systems 
can simply continue to select and execute automatized walking 
behaviors. However, no automatized behavior is indefinite, and 
Sam does still need to periodically check for obstacles. Therefore, 
Sam still frequently looks at the road ahead and re-selects the 
automatized walking behavior.
Eventually, Sam notices a pedestrian and their dog 
approaching. The person and their dog have won the competition 
for consciousness, and Sam’s Action Selection is now choosing 
between multiple candidate behaviors (while Automatized Action 
Selection is making sure Sam is still walking). In Action 
Selection, walking onto the grass or standing still to let the 
dog and owner pass are the two most salient options. Standing 
still wins the competition in Action Selection, and Sam lets 
the person and their dog pass on the narrow path. Choosing 
this behavior also interrupts the automatized walking behavior.
An expectation codelet is generated looking, among other 
things, for a clear walking path since this is the expected 
outcome of Sam’s action. While the dog and owner are now 
behind Sam, the Current Situational Model continues to update. 
Then the expectation codelet brings the empty path structure 
to the Global Workspace to compete for broadcasting. Since 
Sam intends to walk and is expecting to have a clear path, 
the structure has high activation and may win the competition 
for consciousness.
As a result of the empty path coming to consciousness, 
Procedural Memory instantiates relevant schemes including a 
high-level “walking” behavior. This behavior and its behavior 
stream are sent to Action Selection. Action Selection chooses 
the highly relevant automatized “walking” behavior and sends 
it to the Automatized Action Selection sub-module. As a result, 
Sam keeps on walking with the Automatized Action Selection 
sub-module in charge of selecting actions. Now he  is again 
free to continue to think about cryptocurrency, trending TV 
shows, and existentialism.
Driving
Sam is done with his existential morning walk. At 8:00 am, 
Sam drives to work at a local diner. The route is a combination 
of suburban roads and highway driving, and takes approximately 
20 min to complete. Some of the traffic is rush hour traffic.
Sam is utilizing an automatized behavior stream to follow 
the car in front of him at a safe distance. This of course also 
FIGURE 9  |  Here, we see three feedback loops that aid the agent across different timescales of smooth coping. The cognitive cycle in general aims to keep the 
agent in an equilibrium with its environment across long time scales. For example, winning a tournament. The attention cycle attunes the agent to their current 
context and the task(s) they are currently undertaking. For example, the context and task of playing and winning a soccer match. Finally, the dorsal stream cycle 
aims to keep the agent optimally adapted to their current task at the motoric level across rapid time scales. For example, dribbling, tackling, avoiding other players, 
shooting at the goal.

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
17	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
includes the motor plan for safe distance following which is 
receiving constant dorsal stream updating. Dorsal stream input 
to the motor plan makes sure that Sam does not push the 
gas pedal too hard or too softly. Following another car at the 
appropriate distance in rush hour traffic involves constant 
adjustment of motor commands to apply the right amount of 
pressure to the gas pedal.
However, since this is rush hour, Sam also needs to hit 
the brakes often and at the appropriate pressure. This means 
that through consciously mediated action selection, the behavior 
to press the brake is selected and executed at the appropriate 
level of pressure. Hence, Sam has an automatized car following 
behavior scheme and motor plan that is being frequently 
interrupted by the consciously mediated behavior of pushing 
the brake to remain at the right distance. Each time the 
brake has been pushed an expectation codelet is generated 
and helps the resulting distance between cars come to 
consciousness. The new distance between cars being broadcast 
in turn helps Action Selection either re-select the automatized 
follow behavior scheme, or perhaps some other automatized 
driving behavior.
Via consciously mediated action selection Sam decides to 
activate the behavior stream for changing lanes. Action Selection 
rapidly chooses each of the behaviors from the lane changing 
behavior stream. Sensory Motor Memory chooses between 
motor plans for each of the lane changing behaviors, and 
Motor Plan Execution begins carrying out the physical 
movements. In short Sam changes lanes; checks the back mirror, 
the side mirror, over the shoulder, turns on the blinker, checks 
again, turns the steering wheel left, turns the steering wheel 
back to neutral, rechecks windows and mirrors.
Suddenly a person who is texting and driving veers into 
Sam’s lane, and an alarm is triggered. The urgency of the 
situation means that the closing of the car bypasses the 
competition for conscious broadcast, and is sent directly to 
Procedural Memory. Schemes are instantiated and Action 
Selection chooses an appropriate behavior stream (break and 
veer). Given the urgency of the situation the break and veer 
behavior stream has very high salience, and easily wins the 
competition in Action Selection. Sensory Memory chooses 
appropriate motor plan templates and instantiates them, and 
Sam slams the breaks and veers the car away from the 
reckless driver.
Since an alarm was responsible for the avoidance maneuver, 
Sam has not yet realized what has just happened. Only 
approximately 100 milliseconds later, after the event has been 
recreated in the Current Situational Model, does Sam become 
“aware” of what just happened. However, during these 100 
milliseconds, the break and veering maneuver takes place due 
to the rapidity of the alarm process. In this way, Sam survives 
the reckless driver.
During the alarm maneuver expectation, codelets were 
created, searching the Current Situational Model for the expected 
results of the dodging maneuver—a safe distance to the incoming 
driver. As this state of affairs obtains, Sam can now use 
consciously mediated action selection and choose to aggressively 
honk at the distracted driver—what a way to start your shift.
The Short-Order Cook
Sam arrives at work a bit grouchy from the driving encounter. 
He  begins his shift as a short-order cook at a diner. This 
diner has a counter with the short-order cook behind it and 
several tables. The diner is particularly busy for the first several 
hours of the day (people are coming in for brunch and 
hangover breakfast). Sam is engrossed in work throughout 
that time and is working on multiple orders simultaneously. 
The orders are coming in at a fast pace, and many guests 
are ordering modifications to their dishes (extra cheese, no 
cheese, chocolate chip pancake on the side, hot sauce on the 
side, side salad instead of fries, etc.) In addition to making 
the variety of menu items, several regulars arrive with their 
special orders and expect to be  greeted as they sit down at 
the counter.
Let us begin with the first order—two eggs benedict, potatoes, 
and a side of halloumi salad (order one). Upon seeing the 
order slip, a distal intention is created in the Current Situational 
Model (finish order one)—this intention cues up information 
into the CSM regarding halloumi salad, potatoes, and eggs 
benedict. First, the intention (finish order one) wins the 
competition for consciousness, and in the next few cycles, 
structures regarding the current state of the kitchen and 
structures with information about eggs benedict, potatoes, and 
halloumi salad, each win a competition for consciousness (given 
the rapidity of cognitive cycles this is all still within the first 
second or two!).
At this point, information regarding the state of the kitchen 
and what to make are now present in the CSM and is broadcast 
to Procedural Memory. This information is now used to 
instantiate a multitude of schemes and scheme streams. These 
candidate behaviors are sent to Action Selection which must 
now choose “what to do.” In this case, the high-level action 
corresponding to the automatized behavior stream of poaching 
eggs is selected and sent to AAS. AAS selects behaviors from 
the “egg poaching” automatized behavior stream and sends 
them to the Sensory Motor Memory module. Sensory Motor 
Memory instantiates the chef’s highly skilled egg poaching 
motor plan, and sends it to Motor Plan Execution. This 
process continues with the other behaviors in the behavior 
stream being selected by the Automatized Action Selection 
sub-module where each action can be  thought of as calling 
the next action. Thus, Sam ends up using automaticity to 
rapidly stir the vinegar–water mix, crack the eggs, and fish 
them back out.
As Sam is poaching eggs via automaticity, a regular customer 
sits down at the counter (Big Lu). The presence of the regular 
is highly salient to Sam, and easily wins the competition for 
consciousness. Procedural Memory upon receiving the global 
broadcast (containing the content of “Big Lu the regular”) 
instantiates several greeting behaviors, one of which is selected 
by Action Selection. Simultaneously, the egg poaching 
automatized behavior is still being executed. In other words, 
Sam is now stirring the pot rapidly with one hand, cracking 
eggs into the pot with the other hand, and directing his posture 
toward the customer while saying, “what’s up man, how 
you  been?”

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
18	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
Big Lu tries to greet Sam over the counter with a handshake. 
But since Sam’s hands are full, he needs to use a compensating 
behavior. The outstretched hand comes to consciousness and 
instantiates several possible candidate behaviors—one such 
behavior is to use the elbow to complete the greeting. Choosing 
this behavior means that a motor plan is instantiated that also 
takes into account that Sam is still stirring a pot and cracking 
eggs via automaticity. As Sam reaches his elbow over the 
counter so that Big Lu can high-five his elbow, Sam’s motor 
plans for stirring and egg cracking can be  radically adjusted 
through dorsal stream information and/or through subsequent 
conscious broadcasts.
As the eggs are being finished, a new order comes in: 
French toast and scrambled eggs with a side of bacon (order 
two). This fact comes to consciousness and creates a distal 
intention for order two which is stored for later retrieval in 
Sam’s Transient Episodic Memory as well as the CSM. Once 
Sam finishes order one, he  can attend to and work on order 
two. However, at the moment, Sam still needs to assemble 
order one. The order two intention wins the competition for 
consciousness, and the intention is broadcast throughout the 
model, including various short and long-term memory modules 
(Sam is now working with two distal intentions present in 
the CSM).
However, Sam is still working on order one. So, Sam is 
now using consciously mediated actions to carefully assemble 
the eggs benedict for order one (he needs to grasp and assemble 
English muffin, ham, poached eggs, and hollandaise sauce).
Given that there are several chefs in the kitchen Sam does 
not have to make everything from scratch (for example, one 
worker is at the sauce station, another is at the meats stations). 
However, Sam does need to know where each component is 
and the location and activities of his co-workers. This information 
is updated in Sam’s Current Situational Model, including 
affordances in the environment. For example, if the lid is on 
the hollandaise pot, the sauce is not available for pouring. 
However, if the lid is at a tilt, Sam knows from engrained 
institutional knowledge that his co-worker is done with the 
sauce. In this case, the pot, therefore, affords “pourability” and 
Sam uses that information to perform a consciously mediated 
action of pouring some sauce onto the eggs.
As Sam is assembling the eggs benedict, pouring sauce, 
and adjusting the garnish, he  is comparing the current state 
of the dish to long-term memory of what eggs benedict generally 
ought to look like—presentation is half the battle. Furthermore, 
as he is adding each component to the dish, expectation codelets 
are continually keeping his attention on track.
Sam puts the finished dish on the service counter for servers 
to pick up and begins order two, as orders three, four, and 
five arrive. As Sam is using automatized actions to make more 
eggs, flipping sauteed potatoes, or stirring, he  is also keeping 
track of each order, and Action Selection is repeatedly sending 
new behaviors forward. Intermittent with the constant dance 
between automatized behaviors and consciously mediated 
behaviors, Sam might need to deliberate. For example, should 
Sam work on order five instead of four since not all the 
ingredients for four are ready? An ideomotor process begins 
with proposers, supporters, and objectors. “No, let us do the 
dishes in first come first order. That is easiest” “yes, let us 
put order four on hold to knock down the order we  can 
while we  wait for the salmon to finish cooking.” Even as Sam 
is actively deliberating, he  is still executing both automatized 
actions and consciously mediated actions. Ultimately, skipping 
order four while the salmon is cooking wins the deliberation 
process, and Action Selection chooses behaviors relevant to 
making order five.
Around 4 pm the brunch rush is finally over, and Sam gets 
to hang up his apron and go home. What a day!
CONCLUSION
Smooth coping is a common phenomenon in high skill activities, 
such as sports and performance, but also in our daily lives 
as we  navigate the world. Smooth coping generally involves 
the cohering and centering of cognitive activity toward a task 
or activity (which is often highly culturally determined).
Learning intelligent decision agent agents engage in smooth 
coping by interweaving several forms of action selection including; 
consciously mediated action selection, volitional action selection, 
alarms, and automatization. Automatizations are overlearned 
behavior streams that allow for the selection of behaviors 
without conscious intervention; conceptually for one action to 
call the next. These automatizations also facilitate the concurrency 
of automatized action execution. Not only can automatized 
behavior streams be  executed concurrently, but they can also 
be  hierarchically structured. Smooth coping generally involves 
the biasing of attention and adaptivity toward tasks so that 
agents can gain an optimal grip on their various contexts. 
The LIDA model contains various feedback loops across distal, 
proximal, and rapid timescales that aid the agent in adaptivity. 
In line with recent embodied and enactive approaches to 
cognition, LIDA agents are constantly answering the question 
“what should I  do next?” Through interwoven action and 
perception loops the agent pursues its agenda, and in the 
process reaches higher degrees of adaptivity across different 
time scales.
One strength of the smooth coping literature and our 
exploration of smooth coping in LIDA is that both expert 
action and quotidian life utilizes the same cognitive resources, 
and thus we  can map a clear progression from novice to 
expert without the use of any additional “special” cognitive 
resources. In fact, from the literature on smooth coping and 
our overview of smooth coping in LIDA we  can come to 
appreciate the complexity that goes into both expert performance 
and everyday cognition. Despite the ease at which it is performed, 
smooth coping is an immense achievement for any cognitive 
system be  it artificial or organic.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct, and intellectual 
contribution to the work and approved it for publication.

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
19	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
 
REFERENCES
Anderson, M. L. (2014). After Phrenology. Vol. 547. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baars, B. J. (1988). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Baars, B. J. (2019). ON CONSCIOUSNESS: Science & Subjectivity—Updated 
Works on Global Workspace Theory. New York, NY: The Nautilus Press.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behav. Brain Sci. 22, 577–660. 
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X99002149
Bermúdez, J. P. (2017). Do we  reflect while performing skillful actions? 
Automaticity, control, and the perils of distraction. Philos. Psychol. 30, 
896–924. doi: 10.1080/09515089.2017.1325457
Bresnahan, A. (2014). Improvisational artistry in live dance performance as 
embodied and extended agency. Dance Res. J. 46, 85–94. doi: 10.1017/
S0149767714000035
Brooks, R. A. (1991). Intelligence without representation. Artif. Intell. 47, 139–159. 
doi: 10.1016/0004-3702(91)90053-M
Bruineberg, J., Seifert, L., Rietveld, E., and Kiverstein, J. (2021). Metastable 
attunement and real-life skilled behavior. Synthese 199, 12819–12842. doi: 
10.1007/s11229-021-03355-6
Bullard, K., Schroecker, Y., and Chernova, S. (2019). Active learning within 
constrained environments through imitation of an expert questioner. arXiv 
1–8. [Preprint]. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1907.00921
Cappuccio, M. (2019). Handbook of Embodied Cognition and Sport Psychology. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Cappuccio, M. L., Gray, R., Hill, D. M., Mesagno, C., and Thomas, C. H. 
(2019). The Many Threats of Self-Consciousness: Embodied Approaches to 
Choking under Pressure (pp. 101–155). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chemero, A. (2009). Radical Embodied Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Christensen, W., Sutton, J., and Bicknell, K. (2019). Memory systems and the 
control 
of 
skilled 
action. 
Philos. 
Psychol. 
32, 
692–718. 
doi: 
10.1080/09515089.2019.1607279
Christensen, W., Sutton, J., and McIlwain, D. J. F. (2016). Cognition in skilled 
action: meshed control and the varieties of skill experience. Mind Lang. 
31, 37–66. doi: 10.1111/mila.12094
Clark, A. (2016). Surfing Uncertainty Oxford University Press.
Cutsuridis, V., Hussain, A., and Taylor, J. G. (2011). Perception-Action Cycle: 
Models, Architectures, and Hardware. Berlin: Springer Science & Business Media.
de Oliveira, G. S., Raja, V., and Chemero, A. (2021). Radical embodied cognitive 
science and “Real Cognition”. Synthese 198, 115–136. doi: 10.1007/
s11229-019-02475-4
Dewey, J. (1922). Human Nature and Conduct. Baltimore, MD: Holt.
Di Paolo, E., Cuffari, E. C., and Jaegher, H. D. (2018). Linguistic Bodies. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, S. E., and Dreyfus, H. L. (1980). A Five-Stage Model of the Mental 
Activities Involved in Directed Skill Acquisition. Berkeley, CA: California Univ. 
Berkeley Operations Research Center.
Dreyfus, H. L., and Wrathall, M. A. (2014). Skillful Coping. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Ericsson, K. A., and Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory. Psychol. 
Rev. 102, 211–245. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.102.2.211
Fitts, P. M., and Posner, M. I. (1967). Learning and Skilled Performance. Belmont: 
Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.
Franklin, S. (1995). Artificial Minds. 1st Edn. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Franklin, S., and Baars, B. (2010). Two Varieties of Unconscious Processes. eds. 
H. A. Collerton and F. LeBeau (Amsterdam: John Benjamin), 91–102.
Franklin, S., and Graesser, A. (1997). Is it an agent, or just a program?: A 
taxonomy for autonomous agents. Intell. Agents III Agent Theories, Archit. 
Lang. 1193, 21–35. doi: 10.1007/BFb0013570
Franklin, S., Madl, T., Strain, S., Faghihi, U., Dong, D., Kugele, S., et al. (2016). 
A LIDA cognitive model tutorial. Biol. Inspired Cognit. Archit. 16, 105–130. 
doi: 10.1016/j.bica.2016.04.003
Franklin, S., Strain, S., McCall, R., and Baars, B. (2013). Conceptual commitments 
of the LIDA model of cognition. J. Artif. General Intell. 4, 1–22. doi: 10.2478/
jagi-2013-0002
Freeman, W. J. (2002). “The limbic action-perception cycle controlling goal-
directed animal behavior.” in Proceedings of the 2002 International Joint 
Conference on Neural Networks. IJCNN’02 (Cat. No. 02CH37290), Vol. 3, 
Honolulu, HI, USA. 2249–2254.
Fuster, J. M. (2004). Upper processing stages of the perception–action cycle. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 143–145. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2004.02.004
Gallagher, S. (2011). Faculty of law, Humanities and the Arts - Papers. Available 
at: https://ro.uow.edu.au/lhapapers/1373 (Accessed September 25, 2021).
Gallagher, S. (2020). Action and Interaction. 1st Edn. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Gallagher, S., and Varga, S. (2020). Meshed architecture of performance as 
a model of situated cognition. Front. Psychol. 11:2140. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2020.02140
Ghez, C. (1985). Voluntary Movement. eds. E. Kandel and J. Schwartz (Amsterdam: 
Elsevier Science), 493–501.
Gibson, J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Inc. Publishers.
Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem. Physica D Nonlinear 
Phenomena 42, 335–346. doi: 10.1016/0167-2789(90)90087-6
Heidegger, M. (2010). Being and Time (J. Stambaugh & D. J. Schmidt, Trans. 
Rev. Ed.). New  York, NY: State University of New  York Press. (Original 
work published 1928)
Høffding, S. (2019). A Phenomenology of Musical Absorption. Berlin: Springer.
Høffding, S., and Satne, G. (2019). Interactive expertise in solo and joint musical 
performance. Synthese 198, 427–445. doi: 10.1007/s11229-019-02339-x
Jonas, H. (2001). The Phenomenon of Life: Toward a Philosophical Biology. 
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Kelso, J. S. (1995). Dynamic Patterns: The Self-Organization of Brain and Behavior. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kimmel, M., and Hristova, D. (2021). The micro-genesis of improvisational 
co-creation. Creat. Res. J. 33, 347–375. doi: 10.1080/10400419.2021.1922197
Kimmel, M., and Rogler, C. R. (2018). Affordances in interaction: the case of 
Aikido. Ecol. Psychol. 30, 195–223. doi: 10.1080/10407413.2017.1409589
Kirchhoff, M. D., and Kiverstein, J. (2019). Extended Consciousness and Predictive 
Processing. 1st Edn. London: Routledge.
Kotseruba, I., and Tsotsos, J. K. (2016). A review of 40 years of cognitive 
architecture research: Core cognitive abilities and practical applications. arXiv 
[Preprint]. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1610.08602
Kronsted, C. (2021a). Catching the ghost: house dance and improvisational 
mastery. Contemp. Aesthet. 19, 1–8.
Kronsted, C. (2021b). Using affordances to teach improvisational dance. J. Dance 
Educ. 21, 168–175. doi: 10.1080/15290824.2021.1937184
Kronsted, C., Neemeh, Z. A., Kugele, S., and Franklin, S. (2021). Modeling 
long-term intentions and narratives in autonomous agents. J. Artif. Intell. 
Conscious. 8, 229–265. doi: 10.1142/S2705078521500107
Kugele, S., and Franklin, S. (2021). Learning in LIDA. Cogn. Syst. Res. 66, 
176–200. doi: 10.1016/j.cogsys.2020.11.001
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and Adaptation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Madl, T., Baars, B. J., and Franklin, S. (2011). The timing of the cognitive 
cycle. PLoS One 6:e14803. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014803
McCall, R. J., Franklin, S., Faghihi, U., Snaider, J., and Kugele, S. (2020). 
Artificial motivation for cognitive software agents. J. Artif. Gen. Intell. 11, 
38–69. doi: 10.2478/jagi-2020-0002
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2012). Phenomenology of perception (D. A. Landes, Trans.). 
London: Routledge. (Original work published 1945)
Milikan, R. G. (1995). Pushmi-Pullyu representations. Philos. Perspect. 9, 185–200. 
doi: 10.2307/2214217
Montero, B. G. (2010). Does bodily awareness interfere with highly skilled 
movement? Inquiry 53, 105–122. doi: 10.1080/00201741003612138
Montero, B. G. (2016). Thought in Action—Expertise and the Conscious Mind. 
1st Edn. Oxford: University Press.
Montero, B. G., Toner, J., and Moran, A. P. (2019) in Questioning the Breadth 
of the Attentional Focus Effect. ed. M. Cappuccio (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press)
Nakamura, J., and Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2014). “The concept of flow,” in Flow 
and the Foundations of Positive Psychology: The Collected Works of Mihaly 
Csikszentmihalyi. ed. M. Csikszentmihalyi (Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands), 
239–263.
Neemeh, Z. A. (2021). Smooth coping: an embodied, heideggerian approach 
to dual-process theory. Adapt. Behav. 105971232110173. doi: 10.1177/
10597123211017337

Kronsted et al.	
Smooth Coping in LIDA
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org	
20	
April 2022 | Volume 13 | Article 846931
Neemeh, Z. A., Kronsted, C., Kugele, S., and Franklin, S. (2021). Body schema 
in autonomous agents. J. Artif. Intell. Conscious 8, 113–145. doi: 10.1142/
S2705078521500065
Neilson, P. D., and Neilson, M. D. (2005). An overview of adaptive model 
theory: solving the problems of redundancy, resources, and nonlinear 
interactions in human movement control. J. Neural Eng. 2, S279–S312. doi: 
10.1088/1741-2560/2/3/S10
Neisser, U. (1976). Cognition and Reality: Principles and Implications of Cognitive 
Psychology. New York, NY: W. H. Freeman.
Newell, A. (1973). You  can’t play 20 questions with nature and win: projective 
comments on the papers of this symposium. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: 
Carnegie-Mellon University.
Newell, A. (1994). Unified Theories of Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Pacherie, E., and Mylopoulos, M. (2021). Beyond automaticity: the psychological 
complexity of skill. Topoi 40, 649–662. doi: 10.1007/s11245-020-09715-0
Pan, S. J., and Yang, Q. (2009). A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Trans. 
Knowl. Data Eng. 22, 1345–1359. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2009.191
Papineau, D. (2013). In the zone. Royal Inst. Philos. Suppl. 73, 175–196. doi: 
10.1017/S1358246113000325
Papineau, D. (2015). Choking and the Yips. Phenomenol. Cogn. Sci. 14, 295–308. 
doi: 10.1007/s11097-014-9383-x
Ramsey, W. (2007). Representation Reconsidered (1. publ.). Cambridge: Cambridge 
Univ. Press.
Ravn, S. (2020). Investigating dance improvisation: from spontaneity to agency. 
Dance Res. J. 52, 75–87. doi: 10.1017/S0149767720000182
Rietveld, E., and Kiverstein, J. (2014). A rich landscape of affordances. Ecol. 
Psychol. 26, 325–352. doi: 10.1080/10407413.2014.958035
Roseman, I. J., and Smith, C. A. (2001). “Appraisal theory: overview, assumptions, 
varieties, controversies,” in Appraisal Processes in Emotion: Theory, Methods, 
and Research. eds. K. R. Scherer, A. Schorr and T. Johnstone (New York: 
Oxford University Press), 3–19.
Schack, T. (2004). The cognitive architecture of complex movement. Int. 
J.  Sport Exercise Psychol. 2, 403–438. doi: 10.1080/1612197X.2004.
9671753
Segundo-Ortin, M., and Heras-Escribano, M. (2021). Neither mindful nor 
mindless, but minded: habits, ecological psychology, and skilled performance. 
Synthese 199, 10109–10133. doi: 10.1007/s11229-021-03238-w
Sutton, J., McIlwain, D., Christensen, W., and Geeves, A. (2011). Applying 
intelligence to the reflexes: embodied skills and habits between Dreyfus 
and Descartes. J. Br. Soc. Phenomenol. Habit 42, 78–103. doi: 10.1080/00071773.
2011.11006732
Williams, D. (2018). Predictive processing and the representation wars. Mind. 
Mach. 28, 141–172. doi: 10.1007/s11023-017-9441-6
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 9, 
625–636. doi: 10.3758/BF03196322
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, 
or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may 
be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is 
not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Kronsted, Kugele, Neemeh, Ryan and Franklin. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, 
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that 
the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply 
with these terms.
