TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED 14 June 2024
DOI 10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Yuqi Han,
Beijing Institute of Technology, China
REVIEWED BY
Liang Zhang,
Beijing Institute of Technology, China
Tiancheng Dong,
Wuhan University, China
*CORRESPONDENCE
Rousslan Fernand Julien Dossa
dossa@araya.org
RECEIVED 08 December 2023
ACCEPTED 20 May 2024
PUBLISHED 14 June 2024
CITATION
Dossa RFJ, Arulkumaran K, Juliani A, Sasai S
and Kanai R (2024) Design and evaluation of a
global workspace agent embodied in a
realistic multimodal environment.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 18:1352685.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
COPYRIGHT
© 2024 Dossa, Arulkumaran, Juliani, Sasai and
Kanai. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The
use, distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are
credited and that the original publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with
accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
Design and evaluation of a global
workspace agent embodied in a
realistic multimodal environment
Rousslan Fernand Julien Dossa1*, Kai Arulkumaran1,
Arthur Juliani2, Shuntaro Sasai1 and Ryota Kanai1
1Araya Inc., Tokyo, Japan, 2Microsoft Research, New York, NY, United States
As the apparent intelligence of artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) advances, they
are increasingly likened to the functional networks and information processing
capabilities of the human brain. Such comparisons have typically focused on
particular modalities, such as vision or language. The next frontier is to use the
latest advances in ANNs to design and investigate scalable models of higher-
level cognitive processes, such as conscious information access, which have
historically lacked concrete and speciﬁc hypotheses for scientiﬁc evaluation. In
this work, we propose and then empirically assess an embodied agent with a
structure based on global workspace theory (GWT) as speciﬁed in the recently
proposed “indicator properties” of consciousness. In contrast to prior works
on GWT which utilized single modalities, our agent is trained to navigate 3D
environments based on realistic audiovisual inputs. We ﬁnd that the global
workspace architecture performs better and more robustly at smaller working
memory sizes, as compared to a standard recurrent architecture. Beyond
performance, we perform a series of analyses on the learned representations
of our architecture and share ﬁndings that point to task complexity and
regularization being essential for feature learning and the development of
meaningful attentional patterns within the workspace.
KEYWORDS
global workspace theory, attention, embodiment, artiﬁcial neural networks, imitation
learning
1 Introduction
While neuroscience had a profound inﬂuence on the ﬁelds of artiﬁcial neural
networks (ANNs) and deep learning (DL) in the past (Rosenblatt, 1962; Fukushima,
1980; Rumelhart et al., 1986; LeCun and Bengio, 1995), in recent years the direction
of inﬂuence has largely changed, and deep neural networks (DNNs) have emerged as a
popular model of processing within the biological brain. The success of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs; LeCun and Bengio, 1995; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan and
Zisserman, 2014) in the ImageNet visual object recognition competition (Russakovsky
et al., 2015) spurred comparisons between trained CNNs and areas of the brain
related to visual processing (Afraz et al., 2014; Seijdel et al., 2017; Pogoncheﬀet al.,
2023). This trend soon extended to investigating similarities between ANNs and the
auditory cortex (Pichevar and Rouat, 2007; Szabó et al., 2016; Drakopoulos et al.,
2021). Furthermore, the development of ANNs for natural language processing tasks has
advanced our understanding of language processing in the human brain. For example,
these models have been used as tools to explore and generate hypotheses on the neural
mechanisms involved in language comprehension and production (Caucheteux and King,
2022). Similarly, biological research on other aspects of cognition, such as memorization,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
01
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
has beneﬁted from comparative studies between populations of
neurons and their artiﬁcial analogs (Bedia et al., 2007; Li and
Fan, 2019), such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which
are a prominent class of architecture used to process temporal
data (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; Cho et al., 2014; Sak
et al., 2014). Another type of ANN, the Transformer (Vaswani
et al., 2017) has similarly served as an empirically grounded tool
to investigate the mechanism of attention and abstraction in the
brain (Belinkov and Glass, 2019; Wilterson and Graziano, 2021).
Given the progress in using DL for studying natural
intelligence, we believe that now is a prime time to use the
latest advances in DL to investigate higher-order thought processes
and functions in the brain, such as the access and processing of
conscious information (Bengio, 2017; Goyal and Bengio, 2022;
Juliani et al., 2022a). In the same way that DL, which can
directly process raw inputs such as images or audio, is used
to investigate representations in the brain, we are now able to
scale up computational models of consciousness. In particular,
we focus our eﬀorts on global workspace theory (GWT; Baars,
1993), which is one of the most popular theories of conscious
function. This theory was heavily inspired by the structure of the
biological brain: the existence of multiple specialized functional
networks, and the fact that they process the information ﬂow
from the environment in parallel (Baars, 1993, 2005). Early
computational implementations of GWT were necessarily limited
in their sophistication and what domains they could be applied
to Baars (1993) and Shanahan (2006). More recent studies (Goyal
et al., 2021; Juliani et al., 2022b; Butlin et al., 2023) have focused on
DL models which can achieve behavior consistent with cognitive
phenomena related to consciousness, attentional control, and
working memory, considered critical components of GWT (Baars,
2005; Goyal et al., 2021; Butlin et al., 2023); however, each of
these previous studies have lacked evaluation of the model while
embodied within a multimodal environment. The maturation of
both leading theories of consciousness and artiﬁcial models of
cognition therefore warrants additional integration attempts, with
the potential for increasing our understanding of both biological
and artiﬁcial intelligence.
In this study, we followed the recently outlined “indicator
properties” of consciousness: criteria for artiﬁcial agents to manifest
behavior consistent with contemporary theories of conscious
function (Butlin et al., 2023). While Butlin et al. (2023) proposed
indicator properties for various theories of consciousness, these
lacked concrete implementation details. Hence, one of our main
contributions is designing an agent architecture that satisﬁes all
four GWT indicator properties which they outlined—a feat that
they claimed was not achieved by prior artiﬁcial intelligence
implementations. We then trained this agent to perform audio-
guided navigation in a visually realistic 3D environment (Chen
et al., 2020, 2021, 2022), which, to the best of our knowledge, is the
most realistic setting a global workspace agent has been tested in.
We analyzed how the agent’s representations compare to a standard
DL baseline (Alain and Bengio, 2016; Dai et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2022), as well as its attentional patterns. Another one of our main
contributions is performing an extensive set of experiments over
a large range of global workspace sizes, elucidating the impacts of
imposing a signiﬁcant bottleneck on the global workspace size in
the development of dynamic patterns of attention.
Our study reveals key insights from deploying a global
workspace embodied agent in realistic multimodal tasks. In our
chosen task, the global workspace agent performs better and more
robustly than the baseline for smaller working memory sizes,
although the diﬀerence disappears as the size of the bottleneck
increases. Beyond this, we believe that a more sophisticated task or
environment may be needed to reveal potential behavioral beneﬁts
conferred by a global workspace. In particular, this is conﬁrmed
by an ablation on the size of the global workspace, as larger agents
do not perform signiﬁcantly better. We also show that the smaller
agents, with more of a bottleneck, develop more mixed attention
patterns, integrating information from diﬀerent modalities over
time, and all agents primarily use cross-attention across input
modalities to perform the navigation task. Finally, an analysis of
the weight matrices within the global workspace agent’s sensory
encoders indicates that these agents prefer to utilize the global
broadcast to process information over time, as opposed to the more
direct recurrent feedback within the global workspace itself. These
revelations highlight the nuanced, consciousness-related processes
of artiﬁcial agents and emphasize how the global workspace model’s
attention mechanisms are intricately linked to the size of its
workspace. This research paves the way for deeper understanding
and development of artiﬁcial agents capable of more human-like
processing in diverse, sensory-rich environments.
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Functional theories of consciousness
A prominent division of research topics within the domain
of consciousness science is between the study of the so-called
“hard problem,” which seeks explanations for why the phenomena
of consciousness exist given our physical universe, and the “easy
problems,” which consist of explanations for why speciﬁc patterns
of brain activity correlate with speciﬁc states of consciousness
(Chalmers, 1995). The related “hard question” provides a third
possibility of inquiry, seeking explanations for the functional role
of consciousness as it manifests in evolved organisms (Dennett,
2018). This functional approach enables the extension of the study
of consciousness from the exclusively physical domain to the
virtual domain, where artiﬁcial systems with various functional
properties can be compared to systems in the physical world which
we believe instantiate and in some sense “utilize” consciousness
in order to accomplish goals. It is within this domain that
theorists have proposed models such as GWT (Baars, 1993, 2005),
information generation theory (Kanai et al., 2019), and attention
schema theory (AST; Graziano, 2017; Wilterson et al., 2020), among
others (Rosenthal, 1993; Juliani et al., 2022a; Butlin et al., 2023).
GWT
(Baars,
1993,
2005)
is
a
framework
proposed
to
formalize
access
consciousness—the
idea
that
what
is
conscious
is
information
that
is
accessible
across
various
mental processes (Block, 1995). Given its abstract and functional
nature, it has also been theoretically extended to artiﬁcial agents
as well (Dehaene et al., 2021). GWT ﬁrstly posits that the brain
consists of numerous specialized information processing modules
interconnected with each other, where, as an approximation, these
modules can be thought to correspond to functional networks
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
02
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
within the brain. The global workspace can then be understood
as a common representational space of ﬁxed capacity where the
aforementioned modules can share information. It therefore
functions as a pivotal bottleneck, only letting through the most
salient information originating from diverse input modalities and
sources, while integrating them into a coherent representation. The
process of information gating itself can be understood as a speciﬁc
instantiation of internal attentional modulation. In addition, the
global workspace can be interpreted as working memory within the
brain, as it is also expected to maintain the information required to
sustain a state of consciousness across variable lengths of time (Lau
and Rosenthal, 2011; Park and Tallon-Baudry, 2014).
Several approaches have been proposed that take inspiration
from modern cognitive science and DL to attempt to provide a
concrete implementation of a global workspace in an artiﬁcial
system (Goyal et al., 2021; Juliani et al., 2022b). Juliani et al. (2022b)
demonstrated that the Perceiver architecture (Jaegle et al., 2021b)
meets the criteria of a functional global workspace as described
by Baars (1993). Namely, the proposed Perceiver-based agent
structure was empirically shown to satisfy requirements of GWT
such as broadcasting across modules, selective attention and working
memory over a set of behavioral tasks inspired by those used in
the cognitive science literature. However, prior work has been
restricted to unimodal input data, namely either visual or textual
information (Goyal et al., 2021; Juliani et al., 2022b). Humans,
on the other hand, manifest consciousness while navigating the
relatively more complex physical world, which is perceived through
multiple sensory inputs or modalities. This increased complexity
creates strong incentives for the emergence of specialized
independent modules, as well as central mechanisms for sharing
the relevant information from multiple modules to construct
behavior. This multimodality has previously been highlighted as
an important aspect of the global workspace (VanRullen and
Kanai, 2021). The tenets described above are critical components
of GWT (Baars, 1993, 2005; Butlin et al., 2023). Consequently, the
investigation of the existence of consciousness in artiﬁcial agents
could beneﬁt from being conducted in a similar setting.
Despite the breadth of its explanatory power, GWT still leaves
many implementation details underspeciﬁed, which has resulted
in many interpretations by diﬀerent researchers over time (Baars,
1993, 2005; Shanahan, 2006; Goyal et al., 2021; Juliani et al.,
2022b). In their recent position paper on consciousness in AI
agents, Butlin et al. (2023) presented a comprehensive overview of
various theories of consciousness from a functionalist perspective,
including recurrent processing theory (RPT; Lamme, 2006, 2010),
GWT (Baars, 1993, 2005), and AST (Graziano, 2017; Wilterson
et al., 2020), while also touching upon the aspects of agency
and embodiment of such agents. Based on this broad survey of
existing theories of consciousness, they produced a list of indicator
properties that would be highly correlated with the existence of AI
consciousness, from which we compiled the properties relevant to
the scope of this study in Table 1.
While such properties broadly emerge from existing works
investigating
consciousness
in
AI
and
proposing
various
implementations (Goyal et al., 2021; Juliani et al., 2022b),
there is no clear consensus on which method should be used to
implement them. In this work, we analyzed the proposed indicator
properties for GWT and developed a concrete implementation
TABLE 1 Indicator properties relevant to a global workspace agent.
Property
Description
RPT-1
Input modules are independent and use algorithmic
recurrence
RPT-2
Input modules generate organized and integrated
perceptual representations
GWT-1
Multiple specialized systems capable of operating in
parallel, and independently from each other
GWT-2
Limited capacity workspace, entailing a bottleneck in
information ﬂow and a selective attention mechanism
GWT-3
Global broadcast makes information in the workspace
available to all modules
GWT-4
State-dependent attention, giving rise to the capacity to
use the workspace to query modules in succession to
perform complex tasks
that explicitly satisﬁes all of the outlined indicator properties.
We note that while there are other possible neural architectures
which may also satisfy these properties, our goal here is not to be
exhaustive of the space of possibilities, but rather to demonstrate
the characteristics of an empirically validated architecture which is
consistent with the indicator properties as described above.
2.2 Implementations of global workspace
theory
While the primary goal of DL methods may not be the creation
of conscious agents, some of the algorithms and architectures
developed to date share parallels with the high-level cognitive
mechanisms exhibited by humans. Because of these parallels,
we can ﬁnd some aspects in which existing DL algorithms and
ANN architectures that already align with some of the indicator
properties of consciousness, which makes them promising
candidates for implementing high-level cognitive mechanisms.
For example, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are DL
architectures heavily reliant on an attentional mechanism, which
is a core component of theories of consciousness such as
GWT (Baars, 1993; Juliani et al., 2022a) and AST (Graziano, 2017;
Wilterson et al., 2020). While Transformer-based architectures have
meteorically risen in popularity and become widely used across
numerous academic and industrial applications, they lack the
overall structure of a system with a global workspace. Transformers
use self-attention to integrate information from diﬀerent positions
in a sequence, and from diﬀerent modules, thus resembling a
limited-capacity workspace. However, neither those pre-processing
modules, nor the Transformers themselves, are recurrent, and their
residual stream not only lacks a distinct workspace integrating
other elements as a global workspace would, nor does it make such
a workspace accessible to downstream modules (Butlin et al., 2023).
The Transformer architecture has been modiﬁed to include the
addition of a global-workspace-like module (Goyal et al., 2021). In
the system of Goyal et al. (2021) there is a sharing of information
between multiple modules through a common bottlenecked
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
03
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
representation. However, the global workspace presented in this
system is not recurrent, meaning that it is unable to satisfy GWT-4.
The Perceiver (Jaegle et al., 2021b) and PerceiverIO (Jaegle
et al., 2021a) architectures are consecutive iterations of the
seminal concepts of attention-based processing introduced in
Transformers, and are better able to satisfy the indicator properties.
Namely, the Perceiver and PerceiverIO focus on a limited-
capacity latent space to integrate information from specialists,
addressing the computational expense of pairwise interactions
in self-attention. PerceiverIO employs self-attention and cross-
attention to process information in the latent space, allowing it
to handle inputs from multiple modalities. An argument could
be made that Perceiver-based architectures satisfy the property
of having specialized modules (GWT-1), but they only do so
implicitly. While they do feature a latent workspace, the Perceiver
architecture notably lacks global broadcasting to the independent,
pre-processing modules, thus falling short of satisfying GWT-
2. With this in mind, Juliani et al. (2022b) proposed a reﬁned
implementation of the Perceiver which is more in line with the
GWT indicator properties. However, this architecture was applied
to unimodal behavioral tasks inspired by cognitive psychology,
which can be a limiting factor for the emergence of high-level
cognitive processes.
From a distanced perspective, architectures such as the
conscious Turing machine (CTM; Blum and Blum, 2022) also oﬀer
a model of consciousness, inspired by both GWT and theoretical
computer science. While the CTM implementation is concrete
and well-deﬁned, it diverges from the GWT model speciﬁcation.
Notable diﬀerences lie in either the elimination or simpliﬁcation
of certain GWT aspects, such as implementing direct connections
from input to output modules, instead of transiting through a
shared workspace. The CTM emphasizes a computational model
with predictive dynamics and a multimodal inner language which
contributes to its concept of consciousness. From a broader
perspective, this model also considers the roles of special processors
and the interplay of prediction, feedback, and learning in forming
the consciousness experience. We also note that the CTM is purely
theoretical and has not been empirically evaluated.
In this study, we design a global workspace agent that explicitly
accounts for the GWT indicator properties, thereby including those
for RPT. Moreover, we investigate the potential beneﬁts of such
architecture in a realistic audiovisual embodied navigation task.
2.3 Embodied agents
Embodied agents are agents that have a physical body (real or
virtual) with which they interact with their environment (Franklin,
1997). Butlin et al. (2023) emphasized the importance of
embodiment for either biological or artiﬁcial agents to be endowed
with higher-level cognition mechanisms such as memorization,
language, planning, reasoning, emotions, consciousness, and
manifest their functional properties: namely, the existence of
multiple sensory inputs ranging over various modalities, which
must be selectively processed to make decisions given a limited
computational budget. First, this creates pressure on agents to
develop internal (implicit) mechanisms of information processing
and integration. Moreover, it requires the agents to leverage
internal representations toward the completion of goal-oriented
behavior, which is theorized to result in meta-phenomenon such as
consciousness (Gibbs, 2005; Baker et al., 2019; Mugan and MacIver,
2019; Blum and Blum, 2022).
Although only tangentially motivated by the goal of recreating
consciousness-like phenomena in an artiﬁcial context, the ﬁeld of
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has spurred a plethora of eﬀorts
in the development of environments (Baker et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2020, 2021, 2022; Cobbe et al., 2020; Suarez et al., 2021) and agent
architectures (Mnih et al., 2013; Schulman et al., 2017; Espeholt
et al., 2018; Hafner et al., 2020) that learn to achieve a given goal
while navigating through them.
The core components of such agents include sensory modules
which are capable of processing information from diﬀerent
modalities. For example, CNN-based blocks have been leveraged to
build agents that can play video games directly from pixels (Mnih
et al., 2013; Hafner et al., 2020) or other types of high-dimensional
inputs (OpenAI, 2018; Akkaya et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020, 2021,
2022). Solving some complex tasks also requires the ability to
store and process information in a working memory—a capacity
which can be made possible through the use of RNNs (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber, 1997; Cho et al., 2014; Hafner et al., 2020).
Together, embodied agent components should include (multiple)
sensory modules, a working memory, and a policy to take actions
in the environment. Sensory modules can be categorized under
the umbrella of feature-extracting components, allowing agents
to implicitly build representations of their own state, as well as
that of the environment. Those representations are then used
by downstream components, namely the policy network, which
outputs actions that aﬀect the environment (Sutton and Barto,
2018). The policy network is usually implemented as a multi-
layer perceptron (MLP), with blocks built out of linear layers and
nonlinear activation functions (Goodfellow et al., 2016). Figure 1A
illustrates the main components of an embodied agent architecture.
2.4 Global workspace agent
In line with GWT-1, we assume that our agent is embodied
and experiences a multimodal stream of observations, with each
modality being handled by specialized modules that operate in
parallel. Given the audiovisual navigation task utilized in this study
(Section 2.6), a candidate agent architecture is expected to have
an input processing module for each of the visual and acoustic
modalities. As motivated in Section 2.3, we leverage CNNs as a basis
for encoding information from either of these modalities, which
happens to also align with the requirement of having organized and
integrated perceptual representations, as stipulated by RPT-2. Each
input processing module is then equipped with a gated recurrent
unit cell (GRU; Cho et al., 2014) allowing it to leverage a summary
of the previously observed information from the same modality (its
past state), thus satisfying the condition of algorithmic recurrence
as stipulated by RPT-1. The recurrent encoders are augmented with
the ability to incorporate the agent’s previous working memory,
wmt−1, which is processed along with its past state, as illustrated
in the upper half of Figure 1B. The working memory is a central,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
04
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
FIGURE 1
Diagram of agent architectures. (A) Baseline GRU agent with recurrent encoders. (B) Global-workspace agent satisfying all RPT and GWT indicator
properties. The double bars marking the path from the past step’s working memory in the recurrent encoder for each modality emphasize the
gradient-stopping operation during training that was required to stabilize the learning of this agent variant. (C) The proposed cross-attention
mechanism takes as input the past step’s working memory, the current visual and acoustic features to be used as query sources, and then computes
an attention mask for each of those items, along with a null input; this therefore simultaneously incorporates bottom-up, cross, self, and top-down
attention. Intuitively, the attention mask determines which information to incorporate from each input.
recurrent module that exists in all agents we use in this work, and
in the case of our global workspace agent, we consider the working
memory to be the current state of the global workspace. This
feedback connection therefore satisﬁes GWT-3, i.e., the concept
of a global broadcast that makes the information contained in the
workspace available to other modules.
GWT-2 stipulates a limited capacity workspace, entailing a
bottleneck in information ﬂow from the input modules into the
shared workspace, which is overseen by a selective attention
mechanism (Baars, 2005; Juliani et al., 2022b; Butlin et al., 2023).
Consequently, our proposed agent architecture is augmented with
an attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017), making the overall
architecture compliant with both GWT-2, but also introducing a
top-down, state-dependent attention from which the workspace
can directly query modules to perform downstream tasks. The
attention mechanism allows the querying of information that will
be passed from both input modalities’ features into the working
memory for downstream use—for example, to the policy. Making
the query mechanism depend on the previous step’s working
memory, on top of the other two modality components, enables
our proposed architecture to satisfy the state-dependent attention
criterion, thereby fulﬁlling GWT-4. To allow a fairer ablation
study over the impact of the global workspace as an informational
bottleneck, a linear projection is used to match the dimension of
the input modality features and the working memory vectors.
Up to this point, due to the nature of the softmax operation
in the attention mechanism, the proposed architecture forces the
agent to allocate all of its attention over the three inputs (i.e.,
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
05
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
visual and acoustic features, as well as the working memory).
To allow the working memory to be “inattentive”, a null input
component was added to the key and value components of the
attention mechanism, as proposed in RIMs (Goyal et al., 2019).
In case there is no salient information that warrants attending to
the visual, acoustic, or working memory inputs, the model can
(potentially) learn to utilize the null input instead. The detailed
attention mechanism is illustrated in Figure 1C.
The
proposed
mechanism
therefore
outputs
modulated
features corresponding to the previous working memory, the
acoustic, and the visual modalities, respectively. A central GRU
cell will then receive the modulated previous working memory
as its hidden state while receiving the modulated acoustic and
visual features as inputs to produce the next working memory
representation for the current time step, wmt. Analogous to the
GRU baseline variant (Section 2.5), the working memory is then
passed to the policy (“actor”), as illustrated in the lower half of
Figure 1B.
2.5 Baseline agent
Our baseline agent is as similar as possible to the global
workspace agent while ablating the GWT indicator properties. The
simplest of these is to prevent the working memory of the previous
step, wmt−1, from being fed to the GRU cell of each input modality
encoder, thereby negating GWT-3 (global broadcast); this does
however retain RPT-1 and RPT-2.
Altering the overall structure of the agent by having a
joint input processing module over both the visual and acoustic
modalities would introduce a signiﬁcant gap when compared to the
global workspace agent and the original reference implementation
provided in SoundSpaces 1.0 (Chen et al., 2020). Therefore, the
independent nature of each input modality encoder is maintained,
meaning that the baseline agent does satisfy the GWT-1 property,
as illustrated in the upper half of Figure 1A.
All other GWT indicator properties are then negated by
removing our proposed cross-attention mechanism, leaving only
the central GRU cell. While the total size of the input modalities’
features is greater than the size of the state feature vector, hence
resulting in a bottleneck in information ﬂow, there is no attention
mechanism as required by GWT-2 or GWT-4. Instead, the baseline
agent generates the working memory using the unaltered GRU
cell. Finally, the working memory is fed to the actor component
that produces actions used for either training or evaluation, as
illustrated in the lower half of Figure 1A. This baseline agent is thus
equivalent to the SoundSpaces 1.0 agent, augmented with recurrent
input encoders for each modality.
2.6 Multimodal 3D navigation
In this work, we approach the study of the global workspace
in a realistic embodied task by grounding our experiments in
the environments provided by the SoundSpaces library (Chen
et al., 2020, 2022) for audiovisual navigation. SoundSpaces
introduces a high-quality simulator based on 3D-scanned real-
world environments, paired with a novel sound simulation
engine able to simulate sound sources and wave propagation in
the reconstructed 3D environments. Agents in a SoundSpaces
environment are tasked with reaching an object spawned at
an arbitrary location following acoustic cues produced by said
object, while also using visual information to navigate the 3D
environments. The native audiovisual navigation task proposed in
SoundSpaces 1.0 (Chen et al., 2020) and 2.0 (Chen et al., 2022)
requires the agent to reach the location of a continuously ringing
phone, as illustrated in Figure 2A. However, the lack of additional
classes of objects that can serve as targets can result in relatively
trivial learned representations, while also limiting the emergence of
associations between the acoustic and visual modalities. Therefore,
we leveraged the semantic audiovisual navigation (SAVi; Chen
et al., 2021) extension to SoundSpaces, which incorporates a richer
variety of target object categories and their acoustic properties
(a dripping sink, moving chair or table, crackling ﬁreplace, and
others). Furthermore, the acoustic cues in SAVi are only provided
for a variable length duration from the beginning of the episode.
Having access to a long-lasting acoustic cue during navigation helps
the agent accurately estimate the location of the target location
and ﬁnd the sounding object, as illustrated in Figure 2B (magenta
trajectory). However, acoustic cues of a shorter duration (orange
trajectory in Figure 2B) only help the agent get a general directional
hint, which would force it to commit early acoustic cues into
memory and combine them with visual cues to identify the target
location. Thereby, SAVi provides a challenging environment with
which to test working memory, thus creating a relevant scenario
for investigating the properties of an agent with global-workspace-
inspired mechanisms.
2.7 Agent training
Although the SoundSpaces and SAVi suite of tasks were
originally intended for the training and evaluation of goal-oriented
RL agents, we used imitation learning, as there are several
complexities introduced by RL training on SAVi. Firstly, the
reference agent architecture for SAVi relied on additional input
ﬁelds such as the agent and target’s locations—an assumption
that can limit extensions to broader settings. The agent also
contained manually engineered components speciﬁcally geared
toward goal-oriented navigation. Despite these additions, the agent
was only able to achieve an average success rate of 25%. Moreover,
training under the RL paradigm introduces greater variance in
the results. Namely, two agent architectures trained under RL
might achieve drastically diﬀerent ﬁnal performances or learned
representations (Lindsay et al., 2021). Compared to other machine
learning paradigms, RL agents inﬂuence their training data, and
will normally observe highly correlated observation-action pairs.
Therefore, we adopted the behavioral cloning (BC; Pomerleau,
1988) imitation learning algorithm to reduce confounding factors
that might stem from the online RL training paradigm and to
ensure a high baseline level of task performance across conditions.
BC uses supervised learning on expert trajectory data in order
to train an agent. It also guarantees that all agent variants
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
06
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
A
B
FIGURE 2
(A) Audiovisual navigation task provided by SoundSpaces. The agent has to navigate the rooms to reach the source of the noise (a ringing phone),
using a single RGB camera view and binaural audio spectrograms as input. Figure reproduced from Chen et al. (2020) with the authors’ permission.
(B) Two example trajectories of the SAVi (SoundSpaces extension) navigation task. In SAVi tasks, the source of noise can originate from target objects
of 21 diﬀerent categories. In the ﬁrst trajectory (magenta), the agent hears the sound of a dripping sink, while in the second trajectory (orange), it
hears the sound of a cabinet door that is either opened or closed. The duration of the acoustic cues varies. Figure reproduced from Chen et al. (2021)
with the authors’ permission.
under consideration are exposed to the same observation-action
distribution, hereby allowing for isolating the impact of the learned
representations on the type of agent architecture, for a fairer and
more objective comparison.
To this end, we used the native oracle agent included in
the SoundSpaces simulator to generate a dataset D consisting of
500, 000 tuples (ot, a∗
t , dt) of observation, action, and environment
termination samples. An observation consists of 128×128×3 RGB
images for the visual modality, and 65 × 25 × 2 spectrograms for
the acoustic modality. The action space A is discrete and consists of
four actions: allowing the agent to either go forward, turn left, turn
right, or stop, which terminates the episode once the target location
is reached. All the recurrent components of the agents architectures
speciﬁed in Sections 2.4 and 2.5 were implemented as GRUs (Cho
et al., 2014), with layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) to further
stabilize the learning (Hafner et al., 2020; Yoon, 2023).
For a given agent, with policy πθ parameterized by weights θ,
we perform training using minibatches of data sampled from D.
Speciﬁcally, we sample B = 10 (batch size) contiguous trajectories
of length T
= 150 (batch length) from D to produce N
=
B × T action logits {ˆxi = πθ(oi)}N
i=1 via the forward pass. The
base BC algorithm optimizes the cross-entropy between the action
distribution and the oracle action, a∗
t . We augment this with an
entropy regularization term, scaled by a coeﬃcient η
=
0.2,
to mitigate overﬁtting of the agent’s policy (Kang et al., 2018;
Eysenbach and Levine, 2021). Thus, the agents are trained to
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
07
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
minimize the following objective function (Equation 1):
LBC(θ) = −1
N
N
X
i=1
|A|
X
j=1
log
exp(ˆxi,j)
P|A|
c=1 exp(ˆxi,c)
· a∗
i,j + η H(πθ),
(1)
where |A| = 4 is the size of the action space, and H(π) denotes the
entropy of the policy.
In order to ﬁnd the best hyperparameter settings for a range
of working memory sizes, for both the baseline (GRU) and global
workspace (GW) agent, we performed Bayesian hyperparameter
optimization using Weights & Biases (Biewald, 2020). For the
shared modules, i.e., the audio and visual modality encoders,
central GRU cell, and policy network, the same hyperparameters
were used across all agents. We tuned the learning rate ∈
[0.0001, 0.005], the entropy coeﬃcient η
∈
[0, 0.5], and the
maximum gradient norm (gradient clipping) ∈[0.25, 10], based on
ranges commonly observed in the DRL literature (Dhariwal et al.,
2017; Raﬃn et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2022). Each hyperparameter
search was conducted over 10 runs, using 25, 000 iterations, after
which time the majority of performance could be reached. For
the ﬁnal experiments, we used the optimized hyperparameters
(Table 2) for ﬁve runs with diﬀerent seeds, running for 50, 000
iterations. Each run (50, 000 iterations) takes ∼5 days on an
NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU, requiring more than 8,616 GPU hours
in total for the ﬁnal experiments.
Diverging from the reference work by Chen et al. (2020), the
dimension of each modality’s feature vector, as well as that of the
working memory was set to 64. A critical implementation detail to
stabilize the learning of the global workspace agent was to detach
the gradients ﬂowing from the GRU cell of each modality encoder
into the previous step’s working memory wmt−1, as illustrated by
the two bars on the corresponding arrows in Figure 1B. All code
to support our experiments and analysis can be found at https://
github.com/arayabrain/multimodal-global-workspace-agent.
2.8 Agent analysis
We employ a multifaceted approach to evaluate and interpret
the
performance,
learned
representations,
and
attention
mechanisms (when applicable) of the agent variants under
consideration. These three distinct analysis methods enable us to
shed some light on the inner workings of the global workspace
agent architecture.
2.8.1 Performance evaluation
In DRL, a straightforward approach to validate a given agent
architecture is to monitor the episodic return or an equivalent
success metric during the agent’s training. Consequently, each agent
is evaluated every 100 training iterations, using a deterministic
policy where the action with the highest probability is always
picked. Each evaluation phase consists of collecting the success
score (1 if the agent has reached the target location and executed the
stop action, 0 otherwise) over ﬁve episodes, which are continuously
appended to a ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out list of size 50. To analyze the
ﬁnal performance and sample eﬃciency of the agent variants, we
followed best practices and computed the interquartile mean (IQM;
Agarwal et al., 2021), as it is robust to outliers. We calculate the IQM
across the latest 50 evaluation episodes, then over the ﬁve seeds, and
report the ﬁnal IQM ± 95% conﬁdence interval (CI) using 2, 000
bootstrap samples.
2.8.2 Probing learned representations
The SAVi task (Chen et al., 2021) features two semantic
concepts that can be queried from the features learned by the agent.
This informs us of how well information about the state of the
environment is integrated into the learned representations. First,
the target object category, which varies across episodes, is provided
to the agent via the acoustic modality observation, and is available
only for a variable duration from the start of the episode. Intuitively,
this covers scenarios such as brieﬂy-ringing doorbell, a door either
opening or closing, and other frequently occurring situations in
the real world. This information is crucial to success, as the agent
must narrow down the goal to the target object, and the binaural
audio also indicates the general location of and distance of the
agent from the goal location. There are 21 classes of target object
categories in total, covering various daily life objects such as chairs,
tables, cabinets, sinks, and more (Chen et al., 2021). Second, the
scene (room) in which an episode takes place can also be obtained
from the simulator, as well as inferred from the visual observation.
While this information is ancillary to solving the SAVi task itself,
it can serve as a proxy to measure how well visual information is
integrated into the shared workspace. In total, there are 56 scenes in
the training dataset.
Probing neural network representations involves evaluating
and analyzing internal representations within a pre-trained neural
network to understand the learned features and information
encoded at diﬀerent layers. It is thus an invaluable tool for
interpreting the inner workings of ANNs and uncovering the
latent knowledge encoded in their parameters. Namely, we can
use probing to investigate how well information about either the
target object category or the scene is integrated into intermediate
layers of the investigated agent architectures, i.e., the learned visual
and acoustic features, as well as the working memory. Various
works (Pasukonis et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022) employ relatively
simple MLP architectures conditioned on intermediate network
features and trained via supervised learning to classify concepts
of interest, then use the classiﬁcation accuracy as a metric of
eﬀective information representation. Intuitively, attaining high
classiﬁcation accuracy using linear probes suggests informative
and unambiguous learned representations since the concepts
of interest can be reliably classiﬁed with such simple function
approximators (Zhang et al., 2022). Conversely, features that do
not encode enough information to predict the target category
with a higher than chance accuracy can be deemed uninformative
to complete the task at best, and detrimental at worst. We
therefore adapt this methodology to train probe networks over
features extracted from the fully trained agent architectures under
investigation to classify either the target object category or the
scene. Note that the probe training happens independently of
the agent’s training, thus excluding any form of information
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
08
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
TABLE 2 Optimized hyperparameters for each agent architecture type and working memory size.
Model
GRU
GW
Working memory size
32
64
128
256
512
32
64
128
256
512
Learning rate (10−3)
3.526
2.881
3.148
2.581
0.403
1.231
1.902
0.328
4.502
1.248
Entropy coeﬃcient
0.497
0.066
0.221
0.055
0.363
0.420
0.223
0.396
0.200
0.331
Max gradient norm
2.349
8.999
6.728
7.127
8.387
1.890
2.696
1.704
4.817
7.505
leakage from the additional labels programmatically extracted from
the environment.
Let X
= {vis, aud, wm} denote the set of candidate input
features for the probes corresponding to visual features, acoustic
features, and the working memory respectively. Let Y
=
{target object category, scene} denote the set of candidate probe
targets. For each pair (x, y) ∈{X × Y}, we deﬁne a probe network
ξy
φ(x) parameterized by weights φ, which produces the logits zy(x).
In practice, each probe is deﬁned as a 2-layer MLP with ReLU
activations (Fukushima, 1975). Although a two-layer MLP is not
a linear function approximator, recent works (Pasukonis et al.,
2022) demonstrated that probes with higher expressive power are
beneﬁcial and sometimes even necessary for interpreting complex
learned representations. The probe training leverages the same
training dataset D that was used in Section 2.7. We ﬁrst extract N of
each of the visual features, acoustic features, and working memory
representations that correspond to one batch of observations. Each
probe then receives a mini-batch of size K = 30 of the appropriate
input features x, and is trained to minimize the cross-entropy loss
corresponding to its target y over 3, 250 iterations, using the Adam
optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014) with a learning rate of 2.5 ×
10−4. Finally, we evaluate each probe’s accuracy over a held-out
evaluation set of 150 trajectories spanning six diﬀerent target object
categories and ﬁve scenes, and report the classiﬁcation accuracy.
2.8.3 Attention weights
The
exploration
of
attention
weights
produced
in
attention
mechanisms
proves
invaluable
in
unraveling
the
intricate
interplay
between
inputs
of
Transformer-based
models (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Clark et al., 2019; Caucheteux
and King, 2020). With the capability to concurrently focus
on
distinct
segments
of
the
input
modalities,
attention
becomes
a
powerful
tool
for
understanding
information
processing from diﬀerent modalities,
and their integration
into the global workspace. Therefore, one key aspect attention
weights help us investigate is the dynamic nature of inter-
modality interactions. By scrutinizing these weights, we aim
to discern whether speciﬁc modalities consistently capture
the
same
content
from
input
modalities,
unveiling
the
nuanced relationships between diﬀerent types of information.
Moreover, attention weights can also serve as a quantitative
metric
for
gauging
the
importance
of
each
modality.
Namely, the higher the attention weight, the greater the
signiﬁcance attributed to a particular modality or feature.
This quantitative measure would thus allow us to identify crucial
elements involved in the decision-making of the proposed
global workspace agent.
2.8.4 Contribution of the global workspace
broadcast
The broadcast operation is a critical component of GWT. It is
designed to share available information across diﬀerent cognitive
processes and modules, allowing them to either prioritize or ignore
some local stimuli to the beneﬁt of the overarching objective. As
illustrated in Figure 1B, the broadcast is implemented by passing
the working memory from the previous time step to the memory
cell of the visual and acoustic encoders, respectively. We investigate
the general contribution—or lack thereof—of the global workspace
at the local level of input processing. To this end, we compute
the average magnitude of the linear layer’s weights, normalized
by the average magnitude of the input features, split on whether
they map either the input modality or the past working memory
to the encoder recurrent cell. The relative magnitudes give us a
basic measure of the relative importance of the bottom-up vs. top-
down inputs. By normalizing by the average magnitude of the
inputs, we account for the audio or vision features having a diﬀerent
distribution to that of the working memory features.
3 Results
3.1 Performance evaluation
Figure 3 shows the success rate of each agent type over
the training process grouped by their working memory sizes.
As detailed previously (Section 2.8.1), we calculated the IQM
± 95% CI of the rolling average over the last 50 evaluations.
The global workspace agent is relatively robust, achieving ∼80%
performance across all memory sizes, apart from size 256, where
some runs performed poorly; we believe that given the rest of the
results, these could be outliers. For reference, a random policy
achieves 0% success, while the original SAVi agent trained with
RL only reached 25% success on average (Chen et al., 2021).
In comparison to the global workspace agent, the baseline GRU
agent was less robust, achieving only over 60% performance
during the course of training across all memory sizes, and only
becoming more stable and competitive with the global workspace
agent at higher working memory sizes. Performance sometimes
declines after the halfway point, which may be an artifact of our
hyperparameter optimization runs stopping at this point to reduce
the computational requirements by ∼4,000 GPU hours. Regardless,
the negligible diﬀerence observed across diﬀerent working memory
sizes for the global workspace agent implies that the capacity of
the short-term memory required by the task is relatively small.
Thus, SAVi is not an adequate benchmark for testing working
memory capacity.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
09
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
FIGURE 3
Success rate of each agent type, across a range of working memory sizes. We report the IQM ± 95% CI of the rolling average over the last 50
evaluations, aggregated over ﬁve independent runs (random seeds). The performance of the global workspace agent is more robust, particularly for
smaller working memory sizes.
FIGURE 4
Probing accuracy for the target object category and scene, conditioned on the working memory, visual features, and acoustic features respectively,
grouped by working memory sizes and agent variants. Accuracies are averaged over all evaluation trajectories and ﬁve independent runs, with error
bars representing ±1 standard deviation.
3.2 Probing
Figure 4 shows the probing accuracy for the target object
category (top row) and the scene (bottom row), averaged over the
held-out evaluation trajectories and grouped by agent architecture.
First, we can ascertain that information relating to the target object
category is indeed prevalent in the features produced by the acoustic
modality encoder (green bars in the top row of Figure 4), given the
relatively high accuracy in predicting the category based on said
features. The baseline agent does retain more information about the
target object category in working memory as the size of the memory
increases, whereas there is no trend for the global workspace agent.
However, there is no other clear diﬀerence between the agents,
and neither is there any obvious relationship to performance
(Section 3.1). Surprisingly, the classiﬁcation accuracy of the target
object category given visual features ranges from 14 to 37%, which is
signiﬁcantly above chance accuracy of 1/21 ≈4%, thus suggesting
that parts of the visual observations also provide target object
category related information. Indeed, we can expect the agent to be
exposed to some information about the target object category (e.g.,
chair) as they come within its visual ﬁeld of view.
Analogously to the target object category, the highest probing
accuracy for the scene comes from the visual features. This
also aligns with our intuitive understanding of an audiovisual
navigation task, in that the visual modality is the most important
when it comes to identifying which room the agent is navigating
through. There is no particular trend in probing accuracy across
working memory sizes or between the baseline and global
workspace agents. The lowest accuracy is 4% for the smallest
baseline agent, which is only slightly above chance (1/56
≈
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
10
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
FIGURE 5
Probing accuracy for the target object category based on the agent’s working memory, across ﬁve diﬀerent trajectories. The gray area delineates the
part of each trajectory where the acoustic cues are playing.
1.79%). As the task can be solved without knowledge of the scene’s
identiﬁcation or its layout, this is perhaps to be expected. When
it comes to predicting the scene based on the audio features,
the variants achieved between 6 and 14%. This is still higher
than chance accuracy, and might be attributed to speciﬁc acoustic
cues that uniquely characterize some scenes, such as reverberation
patterns that depend on the room’s layout (Chen et al., 2020,
2021, 2022). While most agent variants managed to integrate
enough information from both visual and acoustic modalities
into their working memory to succeed at the task, the global
workspace agent with memory size 128 seems to achieve the best
information integration from both modalities. Figure 5 shows the
probing accuracy based on the working memory for the target
object category over ﬁve unrolled trajectories, grouped by working
memory sizes and agent types. The gray area delineates the part
of each trajectory where acoustic cues are playing. We observe
that both agent variants encode the relevant information in their
working memory suﬃciently enough for reliable prediction when
rich acoustic cues are playing. However, once the sound is cut
oﬀ, the prediction accuracy drops abruptly for both variants. For
smaller memory sizes (≤128), the global workspace agents exhibit
higher probing accuracy on average, when compared to their
GRU counterparts. This suggests that the global workspace agents
are better at integrating information from the input modalities,
allowing for consistent performance and robustness across memory
sizes (Section 3.1). While this does suggest that neither the
conventional GRU nor the proposed attention mechanism help in
preserving a high enough probing accuracy for the target object
category after the sound cutoﬀ, this does not seem to aﬀect the
ﬁnal performance of the agents, as illustrated in Figure 3. In some
cases, the agent may already be in a location where the task can
be solved purely through visual navigation, and of course, none of
the agents achieve a 100% success rate. This nevertheless contrasts
with the hypothesized ability of the global workspace to sustain a
representation over time.
Figure 6 shows the probing accuracy based on the working
memory for the scene over ﬁve unrolled trajectories, grouped by
working memory sizes and agent types. As was already shown
in Figure 4, all of the global workspace agents encode some
information from the visual modality into the working memory,
which translates into a higher probing accuracy for the scene
concept over time.
3.3 Attention weights
Figure 7 shows the attention weights resulting from the cross-
attention based on the working memory query, across ﬁve unrolled
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
11
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
FIGURE 6
Probing accuracy for an episode’s scene based on the agent’s working memory, across ﬁve diﬀerent trajectories. The gray area delineates the part of
each trajectory where the acoustic cues are playing.
trajectories, and ﬁve independent runs (seeds), grouped by the
working memory size. For the same working memory size, there are
no consistent attention patterns across all runs; each agent develops
unique strategies to attend to the input components. However,
there is a clear pattern as working memory size increases—attention
becomes more binary (less mixing of modalities) and the change
in attention access decreases—with attention for the largest agents
essentially saturating at the beginning of the episode. The attention
weights resulting from the cross-attention based on either visual
or audio queries follow similar trends. Despite the diﬀerences in
attentional patterns, all agents were still able to achieve similar task
performance. This suggests that with a small bottleneck, agents
are forced to use dynamic attention patterns, but given suﬃcient
capacity, there is no pressure to do so.
For a more comprehensive view of the attention weights, we
investigated the average attention weights over all 150 evaluation
trajectories for each query and key-value combinations, grouped
by working memory size, shown in Figure 8. In general, the audio
queries largely map to the vision keys, and the vision queries largely
map to the audio keys, which means that the agents largely perform
cross-attention across input modalities. The working memory is
matched with either one, or both, of the input modalities. Notably,
the working memory and null keys are largely unattended to,
potentially implying that most of the important information lies
with the current inputs. However, due to the global broadcast,
past information can also inﬂuence the ﬁnal stage of sensory
input processing.
3.4 Contribution of the global workspace
broadcast
Figure 9 documents the normalized magnitude of the linear
layer mapping the input features (audio or vision) and the previous
working memory wmt−1 to downstream representations for the
recurrent encoders in each sensory module. By this measure, the
previous working memory is prioritized over the current sensory
inputs, for both the audio and vision encoders. Although at ﬁrst,
Figure 8 appears to show the importance of information from the
current time step, these results indicate that the agents are in fact
using the global broadcast to propagate information over time in
order to solve the audiovisual navigation task.
4 Discussion
Motivated by a functionalist approach to consciousness, we
introduced a concrete implementation of an embodied agent
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
12
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
FIGURE 7
Overview of the attentional patterns of the global workspace agents, based on the working memory query, over ﬁve unrolled trajectories.
architecture that fulﬁlls the indicator properties of GWT, as
delineated by Butlin et al. (2023). We then proceeded to investigate
the beneﬁts, or lack thereof, of such an architecture in a
realistic audiovisual navigation task (Chen et al., 2020, 2021,
2022), via feature probing and inspection of learned weights and
attentional patterns.
The global workspace architecture does seem to confer
improved performance and robustness at smaller working memory
sizes. In fact, the performance of the global workspace agents
is similar across sizes, and hence we believe future work should
investigate more challenging domains. In line with our initial
experiments on the SoundSpaces 1.0 task before moving to SAVi,
this hints at the possibility that a more complex environment and
task deﬁnition are required to properly investigate consciousness-
related properties and other high-level cognition mechanisms in
artiﬁcial agents. For instance, Mugan and MacIver (2019) argued
that the massive increase in the complexity of terrestrial habitats
as compared to aquatic ones is likely to have played a role in the
development and emergence of higher-level cognitive abilities such
as planning, reasoning, and consciousness in land-based mammals.
Similarly, Blum and Blum (2022) emphasized the importance
of resource limitations when studying consciousness and related
concepts in artiﬁcial agents. This is echoed in our ablation study
on the capacity of the working memory, which suggests that a
stricter informational bottleneck induces more pressure for the
selective attention mechanism, incentivizing the latter to learn
more dynamic attention strategies over the input modalities. Our
study highlights the need for consciousness research to further
deﬁne the tasks and environment in which candidate architectures
for
conscious
agents
and
high-level
cognitive
mechanisms
can be suitably evaluated. Unfortunately, the development of
realistic simulator environments for training and testing artiﬁcial
agents is a labor-intensive eﬀort, and beyond the scope of
this work.
Two alternative possibilities also exist. The ﬁrst is that there is a
trivial evolutionary advantage conferred by the global workspace.
The second is that the “indicator properties” outlined by Butlin
et al. (2023) are not suﬃciently detailed to capture the unique
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
13
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
FIGURE 8
Attention weights averaged over all 150 evaluation trajectories and independent runs (seeds) for each query and key-value combination, grouped by
working memory size.
FIGURE 9
Normalized average magnitude of the input weights for the audio and vision recurrent encoders, for the sensory inputs vs. the previous working
memory, grouped by working memory size.
computational advantages provided by a global workspace in
biological organisms such as humans. Given the energy expenditure
required to operate the cortex, along with the preservation of
workspace-like dynamics over millennia, the latter might be more
likely than the former. As such, a fruitful area of future work may
be to reﬁne the indicator properties using additional insights from
computational and experimental neuroscience.
Potential avenues for future work would thus be to further
investigate the role of the global workspace as a bottleneck in the
proposed architecture, as well as other quantitative and qualitative
properties, such as the connectivity patterns in the inputs and
their representations in the shared workspace, or the emergence
of cross-modal analogies that encode shared abstract concepts
across modalities.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
14
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
Data availability statement
The
raw
data
supporting
the
conclusions
of
this
article
will
be
made
available
by
the
authors,
without
undue reservation.
Author contributions
RD:
Conceptualization,
Data
curation,
Formal
analysis,
Investigation, Methodology, Software, Visualization, Writing –
original draft, Writing – review & editing. KA: Conceptualization,
Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Visualization,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Formal
analysis. AJ: Methodology, Writing – review & editing. SS:
Supervision, Writing – review & editing. RK: Funding acquisition,
Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
Funding
The author(s) declare ﬁnancial support was received for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. This
work was supported by JST, Moonshot R&D Grant Number
JPMJMS2012.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Changan Chen for sustained
support when working with the SoundSpaces library.
Conﬂict of interest
RD, KA, SS, and RK were employed by Araya Inc. AJ was
employed by Microsoft Research and was also previously employed
by Araya Inc before this work began.
The author(s) RK declared that they were an editorial board
member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. This had no impact
on the peer review process and the ﬁnal decision.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
References
Afraz, A., Yamins, D. L., and DiCarlo, J. J. (2014). Neural mechanisms underlying
visual object recognition. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 79, 99–107.
doi: 10.1101/sqb.2014.79.024729
Agarwal, R., Schwarzer, M., Castro, P. S., Courville, A. C., and Bellemare, M. (2021).
Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. 34, 29304–29320.
Akkaya,
I.,
Andrychowicz,
M.,
Chociej,
M.,
Litwin,
M.,
McGrew,
B.,
Petron,
A.,
et
al.
(2019).
Solving
Rubik’s
cube
with
a
robot
hand.
arXiv
[preprint].
arXiv:1910.07113.
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1910.
07113
Alain, G., and Bengio, Y. (2016). Understanding intermediate layers using linear
classiﬁer probes. arXiv [preprint]. arXiv:1610.01644. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1610.01644
Ba, J. L., Kiros, J. R., and Hinton, G. E. (2016). Layer normalization. arXiv [Preprint].
arXiv:1607.06450. doi: 10.48550/arXiv:1607.06450
Baars, B. J. (1993). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Baars, B. J. (2005). Global workspace theory of consciousness: toward a
cognitive
neuroscience
of
human
experience.
Prog.
Brain
Res.
150,
45–53.
doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(05)50004-9
Bahdanau,
D.,
Cho,
K.,
and
Bengio,
Y.
(2014).
Neural
machine
translation
by
jointly
learning
to
align
and
translate.
arXiv
[Preprint].
arXiv:1409.0473.
doi:
10.48550/arXiv:1409.
0473
Baker, B., Kanitscheider, I., Markov, T., Wu, Y., Powell, G., McGrew, B., et al. (2019).
Emergent Tool use from Multi-Agent Interaction. Machine Learning. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University.
Bedia, M. G., Corchado, J. M., and Castillo, L. F. (2007). “Bio-inspired memory
generation
by
recurrent
neural
networks,”
in
International
Work-Conference
on
Artiﬁcial
Neural
Networks,
Volume
34
(Cham:
Springer),
29304–29320.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-73007-1_8
Belinkov, Y., and Glass, J. (2019). Analysis methods in neural language processing:
a survey. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguist. 7, 49–72. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00254
Bengio, Y. (2017). The consciousness prior. arXiv [preprint]. arXiv:1709.08568.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1709.08568
Biewald, L. (2020). Experiment Tracking With Weights and Biases. Available online
at: https://github.com/wandb/wandb (accessed May 23, 2024).
Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behav. Brain
Sci. 18, 227–247. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X00038188
Blum, L., and Blum, M. (2022). A theory of consciousness from a theoretical
computer science perspective: insights from the conscious turing machine. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 119:e2115934119. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2115934119
Butlin, P., Long, R., Elmoznino, E., Bengio, Y., Birch, J., Constant, A., et al. (2023).
Consciousness in artiﬁcial intelligence: insights from the science of consciousness.
arXiv [preprint]. arXiv:2308.08708. doi: 10.48550/arXiv:2308.08708
Caucheteux,
C.,
and
King,
J.-R.
(2020).
Language
processing
in
brains
and deep neural networks: computational convergence and its limits. bioRxiv.
doi: 10.1101/2020.07.03.186288
Caucheteux, C., and King, J.-R. (2022). Brains and algorithms partially converge in
natural language processing. Commun. Biol. 5:134. doi: 10.1038/s42003-022-03036-1
Chalmers, D. J. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. J. Conscious.
Stud. 2, 200–219.
Chen, C., Al-Halah, Z., and Grauman, K. (2021). “Semantic audio-visual
navigation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (Nashville, TN: IEEE), 15516–15525. doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01526
Chen, C., Jain, U., Schissler, C., Gari, S. V. A., Al-Halah, Z., Ithapu, V. K., et al.
(2020). “Soundspaces: audio-visual navigation in 3D environments,” in ECCV (Cham:
Springer), 17–36. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-58539-6_2
Chen, C., Schissler, C., Garg, S., Kobernik, P., Clegg, A., Calamia, P., et al. (2022).
Soundspaces 2.0: a simulation platform for visual-acoustic learning. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. 35, 8896–8911.
Cho, K., Van Merriënboer, B., Bahdanau, D., and Bengio, Y. (2014). On
the properties of neural machine translation: encoder-decoder approaches. arXiv
[preprint]. arXiv:1409.1259. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1409.1259
Clark, K., Khandelwal, U., Levy, O., and Manning, C. D. (2019). What does
bert look at? An analysis of BERT’s attention. arXiv [Preprint]. arXiv:1906.04341.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1906.04341
Cobbe, K., Hesse, C., Hilton, J., and Schulman, J. (2020). “Leveraging procedural
generation to benchmark reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 37th
International Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR), 2048–2056.
Dai, T., Arulkumaran, K., Gerbert, T., Tukra, S., Behbahani, F., Bharath, A. A.,
et al. (2022). Analysing deep reinforcement learning agents trained with domain
randomisation. Neurocomputing 493, 143–165. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2022.04.005
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
15
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
Dehaene, S., Lau, H., and Kouider, S. (2021). “What is consciousness, and could
machines have it?” in Robotics, AI, and Humanity: Science, Ethics, and Policy, eds. J.
von Braun, M. S. Archer, G. M. Reichberg, and M. S. Sorondo (Cham: Springer), 43–56.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-54173-6_4
Dennett, D. C. (2018). Facing up to the hard question of consciousness. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. B: Biol. Sci. 373:20170342. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2017.0342
Dhariwal, P., Hesse, C., Klimov, O., Nichol, A., Plappert, M., Radford, A., et al.
(2017). OpenAI Baselines. Available online at: https://github.com/openai/baselines
(accessed May 23, 2024).
Drakopoulos, F., Baby, D., and Verhulst, S. (2021). A convolutional neural-network
framework for modelling auditory sensory cells and synapses. Commun. Biol 4:827.
doi: 10.1038/s42003-021-02341-5
Espeholt, L., Soyer, H., Munos, R., Simonyan, K., Mnih, V., Ward, T., et al.
(2018). “Impala: scalable distributed deep-Rl with importance weighted actor-learner
architectures,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning
(Stockholm: PMLR), 1407–1416.
Eysenbach, B., and Levine, S. (2021). Maximum entropy RL (Provably)
solves
some
robust
RL
problems.
arXiv
[preprint].
arXiv:2103.06257.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv:2103.06257
Franklin, S. (1997). Autonomous agents as embodied AI. Cybern. Syst. 28, 499–520.
doi: 10.1080/019697297126029
Fukushima, K. (1975). Cognitron: a self-organizing multilayered neural network.
Biol. Cybern. 20, 121–136. doi: 10.1007/BF00342633
Fukushima, K. (1980). Neocognitron: a self-organizing neural network model for
a mechanism of pattern recognition unaﬀected by shift in position. Biol. Cybern. 36,
193–202. doi: 10.1007/BF00344251
Gibbs Jr, R. W. (2005). Embodiment and Cognitive Sciences. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511805844
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. (2016). Deep Learning. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Goyal, A., and Bengio, Y. (2022). Inductive Biases for deep learning of higher-level
cognition. Proc. R. Soc. A 478:20210068. doi: 10.1098/rspa.2021.0068
Goyal, A., Didolkar, A., Lamb, A., Badola, K., Ke, N. R., Rahaman, N., et al.
(2021). Coordination among neural modules through a shared global workspace. arXiv
[Preprint]. arXiv:2103.01197. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2103.01197
Goyal, A., Lamb, A., Hoﬀmann, J., Sodhani, S., Levine, S., Bengio, Y., et al.
(2019). Recurrent independent mechanisms. arXiv [Preprint]. arXiv:1909.10893.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1909.10893
Graziano, M. S. (2017). The attention schema theory: a foundation for engineering
artiﬁcial consciousness. Front. Robot. AI 4:60. doi: 10.3389/frobt.2017.00060
Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Norouzi, M., and Ba, J. (2020). Mastering atari with discrete
world models. arXiv [Preprint]. arXiv:2010.02193. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2010.02193
Hochreiter, S., and Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural
Comput. 9, 1735–1780. doi: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735
Huang, S., Dossa, R. F. J., Ye, C., Braga, J., Chakraborty, D., Mehta, K., et al. (2022).
Cleanrl: high-quality single-ﬁle implementations of deep reinforcement learning
algorithms. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 23, 1–18.
Jaegle, A., Borgeaud, S., Alayrac, J.-B., Doersch, C., Ionescu, C., Ding, D., et al.
(2021a). Perceiver IO: a general architecture for structured inputs & outputs. arXiv
[Preprint]. arXiv:2107.14795. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2107.14795
Jaegle, A., Gimeno, F., Brock, A., Vinyals, O., Zisserman, A., Carreira, J., et al.
(2021b). “Perceiver: general perception with iterative attention,” in Proceedings of the
38th International Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR), 4651–4664.
Juliani, A., Arulkumaran, K., Sasai, S., and Kanai, R. (2022a). On the link between
conscious function and general intelligence in humans and machines. Trans. Mach.
Learn. Res. 2022.
Juliani, A., Kanai, R., and Sasai, S. S. (2022b). “The perceiver architecture is a
functional global workspace,” in Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (eScholarship).
Kanai, R., Chang, A., Yu, Y., Magrans de Abril, I., Biehl, M., and Guttenberg,
N. (2019). Information generation as a functional basis of consciousness. Neurosci.
Conscious. 2019:niz016. doi: 10.1093/nc/niz016
Kang, B., Jie, Z., and Feng, J. (2018). “Policy optimization with demonstrations,”
in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR),
2469–2478.
Kingma, D. P., and Ba, J. (2014). Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
[Preprint]. arXiv:1412.6980. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2012). Imagenet classiﬁcation with
deep convolutional neural networks. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 25.
Lamme, V. A. (2006). Towards a true neural stance on consciousness. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 10, 494–501. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2006.09.001
Lamme, V. A. (2010). How neuroscience will change our view on consciousness.
Cogn. Neurosci. 1, 204–220. doi: 10.1080/17588921003731586
Lau, H., and Rosenthal, D. (2011). Empirical support for higher-order theories of
conscious awareness. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 365–373. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.05.009
LeCun, Y., and Bengio, Y. (1995). “Convolutional networks for images, speech, and
time series,” in The Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Networks, ed. M. A. Arbib
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 3361.
Li, H., and Fan, Y. (2019). Interpretable, highly accurate brain decoding of
subtly distinct brain states from functional MRI using intrinsic functional networks
and long short-term memory recurrent neural networks. Neuroimage 202:116059.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116059
Lindsay,
G.
W.,
Merel,
J.,
Mrsic-Flogel,
T.,
and
Sahani,
M.
(2021).
Divergent representations of ethological visual inputs emerge from supervised,
unsupervised, and reinforcement learning. arXiv [preprint]. arXiv:2112.02027.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2112.02027
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A., Antonoglou, I., Wierstra,
D., et al. (2013). Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv [Preprint].
arXiv:1312.5602. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1312.5602
Mugan, U., and MacIver, M. A. (2019). The shift to life on land selected for planning.
bioRxiv. doi: 10.1101/585760
OpenAI (2018). OpenAI Five.
Park, H.-D., and Tallon-Baudry, C. (2014). The neural subjective frame: from bodily
signals to perceptual consciousness. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B: Biol. Sci. 369:20130208.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2013.0208
Pasukonis, J., Lillicrap, T., and Hafner, D. (2022). Evaluating long-term memory in
3D mazes. arXiv [preprint]. arXiv:2210.13383. doi: 10.48550/arXiv:2210.13383
Pichevar, R., and Rouat, J. (2007). Monophonic sound source separation with
an unsupervised network of spiking neurones. Neurocomputing 71, 109–120.
doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2007.08.001
Pogoncheﬀ, G., Granley, J., and Beyeler, M. (2023). Explaining V1 properties with
a biologically constrained deep learning architecture. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36,
13908–13930.
Pomerleau, D. A. (1988). Alvinn: an autonomous land vehicle in a neural network.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 1.
Raﬃn, A., Hill, A., Gleave, A., Kanervisto, A., Ernestus, M., Dormann, N., et al.
(2021). Stable baselines 3: reliable reinforcement learning implementations. J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 22, 1–8.
Rosenblatt,
F.
(1962).
Principles
of
Neurodynamics:
Perceptrons
and
the
Theory
of
Brain
Mechanisms,
Vol.
55.
Washington,
DC:
Spartan
Books.
doi: 10.21236/AD0256582
Rosenthal, D. M. (1993). Higher-order thoughts and the appendage theory of
consciousness. Philos. Psychol. 6, 155–166. doi: 10.1080/09515089308573085
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and McClelland, J. L. (1986). “A general
framework for parallel distributed processing,” in Parallel Distributed Processing:
Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition, vol. 1, eds. D. E. Rumelhart,
J. L. McClelland, and PDP Research Group (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 26.
doi: 10.7551/mitpress/5236.001.0001
Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S., Ma, S., et al. (2015).
Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 115, 211–252.
doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y
Sak, H., Senior, A. W., and Beaufays, F. (2014). Long short-term memory recurrent
neural network architectures for large scale acoustic modeling. Proc. Interspeech 2014,
338–342. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2014-80
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. (2017).
Proximal
policy
optimization
algorithms.
arXiv
[preprint].
arXiv:1707.06347.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1707.06347
Seijdel, N., Losch, M., de Haan, E., and Scholte, S. (2017). Comparing human
and convolutional neural network performance on scene segmentation. J. Vis. 17,
1344–1344. doi: 10.1167/17.10.1344
Shanahan,
M.
(2006).
A
cognitive
architecture
that
combines
internal
simulation
with
a
global
workspace.
Conscious.
Cogn.
15,
433–449.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2005.11.005
Simonyan,
K.,
and
Zisserman,
A.
(2014).
Very
deep
convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv [Preprint]. arXiv:1409.1556.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv:1409.1556
Suarez, J., Du, Y., Zhu, C., Mordatch, I., and Isola, P. (2021). “The neural MMO
platform for massively multiagent research,” in Proceedings of the Neural Information
Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks, Vol. 1, eds. J. Vanschoren, and
S. Yeung (Sydney, NSW).
Sutton, R. S., and Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Szabó, B. T., Denham, S. L., and Winkler, I. (2016). Computational models of
auditory scene analysis: a review. Front. Neurosci. 10:222010. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.
00524
VanRullen, R., and Kanai, R. (2021). Deep learning and the global workspace theory.
Trends Neurosci. 44, 692–704. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2021.04.005
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
16
frontiersin.org

Dossa et al.
10.3389/fncom.2024.1352685
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., et al.
(2017). “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems.
Wilterson, A. I., and Graziano, M. S. (2021). The attention schema theory in a neural
network agent: controlling visuospatial attention using a descriptive model of attention.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 118:e2102421118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2102421118
Wilterson, A. I., Kemper, C. M., Kim, N., Webb, T. W., Reblando, A. M.,
Graziano, M. S., et al. (2020). Attention control and the attention schema
theory of consciousness. Prog. Neurobiol. 195:101844. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2020.
101844
Yoon, J. (2023). dreamer-torch. Available online at: https://github.com/jsikyoon/
dreamer-torch (accessed May 23, 2024).
Zhang, W., GX-Chen, A., Sobal, V., LeCun, Y., and Carion, N. (2022).
Light-weight
probing
of
unsupervised
representations
for
reinforcement
learning.
arXiv
[Preprint].
arXiv:2208.12345.
doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2208.
12345
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience
17
frontiersin.org
