COGNITIVE ROBOTICS (WK YEAP, SECTION EDITOR)
Cognitive Robots and the Conscious Mind: A Review of the Global
Workspace Theory
Alessandro Signa1,2
& Antonio Chella1,3 & Manuel Gentile2,4
Accepted: 3 March 2021
# The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Purpose of Review The theory of consciousness is a subject that has kept scholars and researchers challenged for centuries. Even
today it is not possible to define what consciousness is. This has led to the theorization of different models of consciousness.
Starting from Baars’ Global Workspace Theory, this paper examines the models of cognitive architectures that are inspired by it
and that can represent a reference point in the field of robot consciousness.
Recent Findings Global Workspace Theory has recently been ranked as the most promising theory in its field. However, this is
not reflected in the mathematical models of cognitive architectures inspired by it: they are few, and most of them are a decade old,
which is too long compared to the speed at which artificial intelligence techniques are improving. Indeed, recent publications
propose simple mathematical models that are well designed for computer implementation.
Summary In this paper, we introduce an overview of consciousness and robot consciousness, with some interesting insights from
the literature. Then we focus on Baars’ Global Workspace Theory, presenting it briefly. Finally, we report on the most interesting
and promising models of cognitive architectures that implement it, describing their peculiarities.
Keywords Global workspace theory . Robot Consciousness . Cognitive Architecture
Introduction
Despite centuries of interest from philosophers and
scholars, an unambiguous definition of the term con-
sciousness remains lacking. Consequently, AI researchers
are not unanimous as to the defining characteristics of
artificial consciousness and/or what a robot should do to
exhibit conscious behavior [1]. The impossibility to rep-
licate all the aspects of a thinking and conscious subject
has led to the conviction that it is essential to know ex-
actly how the brain works in order to implement such a
reproduction. It is perhaps due to this conviction that
1994 marked a turning point for research in this field: in
April of that year in Tucson, Arizona, the first internation-
al conference on the theme of consciousness (“Toward a
Science of Consciousness”) took place whereby not only
philosophers, but also neuroscientists, physicists, and cog-
nitive scientists were present. Since then, new and multi-
ple criteria have been advanced for the evaluation of con-
sciousness and for the development of theories for de-
scribing consciousness. Among them, in this paper, we
will focus on one specific theory, namely Global
Workspace Theory postulated by Baars [2]. We will sum-
marize its content and analyze some of the architectures
inspired by it. Some of them are already widespread and
used for several years, such as the LIDA architecture
[3–6] and Global Neuronal Workspace theory [7–9],
while others are more modern and niche, such as
CERA-CRANIUM [10] and Conscious Touring Machine
[11•].
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Cognitive Robotics
* Alessandro Signa
alessandro.signa@unipa.it; alessandro.signa@itd.cnr.it
Antonio Chella
antonio.chella@unipa.it
Manuel Gentile
manuel.gentile@itd.cnr.it; manuel.gentile@unito.it
1
Department of Engineering, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy
2
Institute for Educational Technology, National Research Council of
Italy, Palermo, Italy
3
Institute for high performance computing and networking, National
Research Council of Italy, Palermo, Italy
4
Dipartimento di Informatica, Università di Torino, Turin, Italy
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43154-021-00044-7
/ Published online: 6 April 2021
Current Robotics Reports (2021) 2:125–131

Robot Consciousness
Because it is impossible to define consciousness unambigu-
ously, we are also precluded from defining robot conscious-
ness precisely.
The various attempts at defining consciousness given by
scholars, however complete, are often unsuitable as a first step
in modeling artificial consciousness. For example, consider,
on the one hand, the definition of Consciousness Tetrad given
by Singh and Singh [12]. They understand consciousness in
four different forms: the “Default,” which distinguishes the
living from the non-living, the “Aware,” which distinguishes
the state of awake, as opposed to the state of sleep or coma, the
“Operational,” which concerns motor, sensory, cognitive, and
emotional awareness, and finally, the “Exalted,” which refers
to the state of connection with the divine or the soul.
On the other hand, a more recent analysis proposed by
Dehaene et al. [13•] offers a definition of consciousness
through a model that can be adapted to the language of com-
puter science. Starting from the functioning of the human
brain, Dehaene suggests that the term “consciousness” actual-
ly corresponds to two different levels of information process-
ing in the human brain: the first, identified as C1, is the level of
consciousness responsible for the selection of information of
global relevance and worthy of further processing and reason-
ing; the second, defined as C2, is the level of consciousness
related to the autonomous monitoring of the former reasoning,
which then leads to a subjective sense of correctness or error.
Dehaene argues that although C1 and C2 are the characteristic
levels of consciousness, current architectures mainly imple-
ment the unconscious processes that occur in the brain, de-
fined as C0. These C0 unconscious processes consist of com-
plex calculations and inferences that occur continuously and
in parallel within various areas of the brain. For the survival of
the organism, however, it is necessary that these multiple un-
conscious information flows converge into a single informa-
tion belonging to the C1 level in order to lead the actions of the
organism in a coherent way. To such purpose, Dehaene em-
braces the theory proposed by Baars [2, 14] relative to the
Global Workspace through which it is possible to elevate an
unconscious elaboration (C0) up to make it become conscious
(C1), sharing it with the other modules of the architecture in
such a way that the immediately succeeding actions are exe-
cuted according to it. Dehaene therefore defines as “con-
scious” any information that is promoted from C0 to C1 and
triggers the decision-making process.
Global Workspace Theory
An online survey conducted in 2018 on academics and con-
sciousness experts showed that the Global Workspace Theory
was perceived as the most promising consciousness theory
[15]. The Global Workspace Theory (GWT) is a cognitive
architecture first proposed by Baars in 1988 [2]. It has been
over the years and remains a reference point and source of
inspiration for further artificial consciousness theories and
implementations of modern cognitive architectures [3–11,
16–20].
GWT considers the nervous system as a set of multiple
specialized processors working in parallel. The most periph-
eral processors carry information from sensors and transmit it
to other processors responsible for interpreting and processing
that sensory information. The processor, or coalition of pro-
cessors, that carries the most significant information gains
access to the Global Workspace that consists of a fleeting
memory area in which only one piece of information content
can reside at a time. This content is then propagated to all other
processors in order to recruit those necessary to act or react on
the basis of the current situation. In this theory, the state of
consciousness is associated with the memory of the Global
Workspace and the information that resides in it. The uncon-
scious processes of the mind instead are associated with all the
other specialized processors that elaborate the sensory infor-
mation, that compete to win the Global Workspace and that
subsequently are recruited to perform the actions in response
to the current state of the Global Workspace. The criteria for
defining the winner of the competition between the uncon-
scious processors are defined by the current context, intended
as the achievement of a goal or the fulfillment of an emotion.
According to these criteria, the information conveyed by an
unconscious processor could be more or less suitable for ac-
cess to the Global Workspace. The phases of collaboration
and competition of the GWT strategy make it dynamic enough
to be particularly successful in facing unknown problems that
would otherwise be faced in an ineffective or partial way by
isolated unconscious processors [16].
In the following section we will present works related to the
most relevant theories, models, and cognitive architectures
that are inspired by GWT, that is, starting from one or more
assumptions in common with Baars’ theory.
GWT-Inspired Architectures
The first of the models based on GWT we discuss is the
Learning Intelligent Distribution Agent (LIDA) model pro-
posed by Franklin [3–6], which implements and flashes out
many important aspects theorized by Baars in GWT. This
model together with the relative computational architecture
constitute the LIDA cognitive cycle. A cognitive cycle is de-
fined as the process by which an agent, living or artificial,
perceives through the senses the surrounding environment
and creates or updates its representation of it, then processes
that information, and finally acts accordingly. Each cycle is
therefore divided into three phases. The first phase is the com-
prehension phase in which the external stimuli activate the
functionalities of the sensorial memory of the agent that
126
Curr Robot Rep (2021) 2:125–131

generates a percept, such percept is elaborated by an appro-
priate Workspace that generates local associations correlated
to the precept. In this way, the model of the agent relative to
the situation and the actual events is produced. The second
phase is the consciousness phase in which coalitions of per-
cepts are sent to the Global Workspace where they compete to
select the most relevant and worthy to become the content of
consciousness to be sent globally to recruit processors and
resources. Finally, the third phase is the action selection phase
in which action patterns are recruited that are compatible with
what the Global Workspace has sent globally, and these pos-
sible actions compete in order to bring out the most appropri-
ate one for the current cognitive cycle. This phase is also a
learning phase because associations between action patterns,
external contexts, and expected and achieved outcomes are
learned or reinforced. At this point the selected action pattern
is sent to sensory-motor memory in order to activate the be-
havior, to close the current cycle, and to initiate the next one.
These cognitive cycles follow one another continuously
throughout the agent’s lifetime. The Cognitive Computing
Research Group of the University of Memphis led by Dr.
Franklin makes available the open source LIDA framework
implementation through its website. The LIDA software
framework consists of a generic and customizable Java imple-
mentation of the LIDA model, easily adjustable to specific
needs and domain via XML files or modifying the source code
directly. The framework is also provided of several tools, such
as a GUI (to let the user monitor running tasks, parameters,
etc.) and a logging functionality to record the occurrences of
noteworthy actions [6].
In 2005, Shanahan proposed a cognitive architecture that
combines the GWT with an internal simulation model [20].
This architecture, which we will refer to later in this paper as
Internal Simulation with Global Workspace (IS-GW), is deep-
ly inspired by the human brain and consists of two interacting
sensorimotor loops. The first-order loop involves the sensory
and motor centers and determines an immediate response to
stimuli coming from the external world. This response, how-
ever, is mediated by the action of the BG (a component of the
architecture that models the functioning of the basal ganglia),
which evaluates the relevance of the response by comparing it
with other possible responses. These alternative responses are
generated (“imagined”) by the other loop, the higher-order
loop, which on the basis of current sensory stimuli allows to
plan and anticipate actions. Exploiting the previously learned
associations, it simulates internally and in parallel the possible
scenarios in terms of actions performed and their conse-
quences. Within the higher-order loop, it is the Am (a compo-
nent of the architecture that models the amygdala) that asso-
ciates a consequence with each action in the form of reward or
punishment. Among the possible actions, the BG chooses and
executes the most relevant one for the current context, which
is the one exceeding a given threshold of relevance. This is
where the typical GWT competition takes place. The winning
action is then broadcasted to all the other elements of the
architecture. Despite the unfavorable circumstances in terms
of available hardware at that time, Shanahan was also able to
provide an implementation of such a system [20]: although
only by means of a prototype, the validity of the proposed
architecture was demonstrated, which in fact proved the abil-
ity of generating a better motor response to the current circum-
stance (in terms of number of actions carried out) because it
was planned due to the intervention of BG and Am. The sim-
ulation scenario consisted of a configuration of colored cylin-
ders and a simple robot, which ran the prototypal implemen-
tation of IS-GW. The robot, learning from its experience in
that scenario, was able to elaborate the outcome of the next
hypothetical sensory states; thus, it managed to minimize the
required actions to reach the desired cylinder.
Arrabales in 2009 presented CERA-CRANIUM [10], a
cognitive architecture whose implementation [21] in 2010
won the 2 K BotPrize Contest, which is a modified version
of the Turing Test, to evaluate the ability of computer game
playing agents to imitate human gamer behaviors and fool
judges into thinking they are human. The game was the mul-
tiplayer FPS Unreal Tournament 2004 [22]. There, the
Arrabales bot was considered by judges the most human
behavioring bot. They noticed that, on the one hand, there
were several characteristics indicating that a player was a bot
(i.e., missing/stupid behavior and low aggression), on the oth-
er hand, there were other characteristics indicating that a play-
er was a human (i.e., high aggression, adapting to opponent
and good tactics). During that contest, Arrabales’ bot fooled
the judges 32% of the time and was incorrectly identified as
human, while one human player was identified as a machine
35% of time. CERA-CRANIUM (CC) is an architecture for
software control and is mainly inspired by GWT. The main
difference between CC and other control architectures is that
CC does not focus on the details of what the next action to be
performed is, but rather it processes the high-level conscious
content of the next motor content. The motor context is then
responsible for processing this high-level information and de-
ciding how to act. CC consists of CERA, which is a software
control architecture divided into four layers, the middle two
layers make up CRANIUM, which is the execution environ-
ment for creating and managing large amounts of parallel
processes in a shared memory. The bottom layer of the archi-
tecture is the sensory and motor layer that obtains data from
sensors and drives motors to perform actions. The next layer is
the physical layer that manipulates the data from sensors and
actuators and prepares them for the next layer. Higher up is the
mission layer that processes the received data, interpreting
them on the basis of the current goals of the agent. In this
layer, the information content becomes a percept and is direct-
ly related to the mission of the agent, which can be
decomposed into different goals. The core layer is the
127
Curr Robot Rep (2021) 2:125–131

uppermost layer and is responsible for managing the highest-
level cognitive functions. This subdivision into layers gives
the architecture a remarkable modularity: the physical layer is
specific for the agent that implements it but independent from
the current mission, the mission layer is independent from the
agent and specific for the mission to be carried out, the core
layer is finally independent both from the agent and from the
mission, and this allows a straightforward reuse of it.
CRANIUM, which is realized in the physical layer and mis-
sion layer, has two communicating workspaces in which the
processes of competition and collaboration take place, with
multiple specialized processors as key players. All processing
that occurs in these two layers are modulated by the core layer
through special out-of-band commands. These commands in-
dicate which should be the target sensory and motor context,
thus influencing the activation of the specialized processors
and the results they obtain.
A recently published model by Blum & Blum [11•]
aims to study consciousness from the point of view of
theoretical computer science. For this purpose, they de-
fined formally a conscious turing machine (CTM).
Consciousness in this model is contained in the short term
memory (STM), which holds exactly one chunk of infor-
mation at a time to be sent globally. The long term mem-
ory on the other hand is the set of all processors in the
model; their processing is unconscious. There are no other
processors in the CTM besides these just defined. At each
clock tick, each processor generates an information chunk
that competes with the others for access to the STM. The
process of competition takes the name of up-tree compe-
tition and consists of a series of nodes of calculation that
according to the criteria of competition let the chunk ad-
vance. Then the winning chunk is broadcasted from the
short term memory to the long term memory processors
via the down tree, which consists of a direct connection
between the STM and each processor. In CTM there is
also the creation of links between the various processors.
These are formed over time if there are sufficiently fre-
quent conscious communications between two processors,
that is, requests and responses that pass through the STM
involving them. By doing so, unconscious communica-
tions are generated by which processors are able to influ-
ence each other without passing through the STM. In the
CTM, the elaboration and the coding of the information
coming from the sensors and directed to the actuators
happens in the input map and output map, respectively.
The conscious awareness of the CTM consists therefore in
the reception by all the processors of the chunk that has
won the competition. Consequently, it is possible to de-
fine the stream of consciousness as the sequence of
chunks broadcasted by the STM in a given time interval.
Dehaene et al. [7–9] start from the same theoretical
basis as Baars [2] to postulate a new theory: the Global
Neuronal Workspace (GNW) Theory. The common con-
cept between the two theories is that conscious access is
given by the global availability of the informational load
and that what is perceived as conscious is the selection,
amplification, and global broadcasting of relevant infor-
mation. The GNW theory proposes two main computa-
tional areas in the brain: the first is constituted by the
localized and specialized processors that elaborate and
evaluate the sensorial and motorial information; the sec-
ond is precisely the global neuronal workspace, that is, a
set of distributed neurons characterized by their ability to
communicate with each other even if in distant areas.
Given the distribution of these neurons, this theory does
not consider the presence of a single central unit in which
resides the conscious information to be distributed to the
rest of the processors, but the presence of several agglom-
erates of neurons of the GNW scattered in different areas
in order to create a distributed workspace. The conscious-
ness of information is reached when many processors af-
ferent to the GNW converge to a coherent state. The neu-
rons of the GNW are able to receive information from the
various processors and transfer to them the results of their
elaborations; in this way, they accumulate information in
a competitive way in order to eventually make this infor-
mation reach the state of consciousness. Initially the stim-
ulus goes up the hierarchy of processors (bottom-up) in an
unconscious way, then if the stimulus is evaluated as ad-
equate, it is amplified (top-down) and maintained by a
subset of the neurons of the GNW. The whole network
of the GNW is connected in such a way that only one
conscious information at a time can be effective. It is
possible that a non-linear activation of some neurons of
the GNW occurs; this phenomenon is called “ignition”:
the neurons that contain the current conscious content
are suddenly and coherently activated, while all the others
are deactivated or inhibited. Ignition can be triggered by
an external stimulus during the cognitive process or occur
spontaneously from within during a state of rest. This
state of activation is ruled by appropriate vigilance signals
that are strong enough to control transitions between wak-
ing (GNW active) and resting (GNW inactive) states.
Several concrete computer simulations of the GNW archi-
tecture were also proposed by Dehaene et al. [7–9].
Considering for example the simulation regarding the ef-
fortful cognitive tasks can help to understand the vigi-
lance signals’ role [7]. In this computer simulation the
network is fed with routines made of several versions of
the word–color Stroop tasks [23] and the system is pro-
vided with specialized units to accomplish the Stroop
tasks. During the routines consisting of effortless Stroop
tasks, the vigilance was quickly extinguished putting the
GNW in the inactive state, due to the absence of errors.
Instead, during the routines consisting of effortful Stroop
128
Curr Robot Rep (2021) 2:125–131

tasks, the errors and negative rewards led the vigilance to
activate the GNW: its aim is to search the rules achieving
the stable pattern to the correct performance. After a few
effortful tasks trials, the network successfully learned the
Stroop test on the basis of realistic neuronal processes.
Discussion
The theories and models that have been presented are those
inspired by the GWT and which represent, according to the
authors, excellent starting points for further implementations
and/or theories. Table 1 presents a summary of their key char-
acteristics. The column “Year” shows the year in which the
respective theory was first published. The column “Maturity”
shows the degree of completion of each research and study
related to the theory. In that column, “Ready for
Implementation” means that the model is only presented the-
oretically with sufficient details, while “Implementation
Available” means that there are working computer
implementations related to the architecture. The column
“Peculiarities” highlights the key characteristics of each
architecture.
However, in some ways it may be partially incorrect to
consider these four architectures at the same level. In fact, it
should be pointed out that this selection contains the models
inspired by Baars’ GWT, which are the most relevant in terms
of the results obtained, their popularity, and future potential.
Among these, however, the GNW also represents a theoretical
model in its own right: its architecture has inspired subsequent
theories such as those of Shanahan [24, 25] and those of
Whyte related to the predictive global neuronal workspace
(PGNW) [26, 27]. In light of this, it is possible to argue that,
although Baars is the founder of GWT which is today the
predominant theory in this field, Dehaene’s architecture of
GNW, being more specific [28] and less high-level, would
be a proper variation of GWT.
Conclusions
The Global Workspace Theory has been for years, and
still is, a reference for those looking for a model of con-
sciousness, whether we are talking about neuroscience or
computer science. The appreciation that this theory has
received over the years has led the scientific community
to pay increasing attention to it, to the point of creating
architectures based on it or inspired by it. Despite the fact
that more than 20 years have passed since its theorization,
GWT continues to inspires new and interesting models
that are still waiting to be implemented [11•], while for
those which already exist, the field of application is very
wide, for example, from the control of NPCs in video
games [21] to the medical field through clinical simula-
tions [9]. While the theories remain robust and valid, the
remarkable progress made in recent years in the fields of
artificial intelligence, neural networks, and deep learning
opens the way for new and modern implementations re-
lated to them. Therefore, well known and less known
architectures have been reported in this paper: the inten-
tion is to bring attention to them in order to stimulate
more working groups to use the new software and hard-
ware tools to give concrete (and modern) life to these
valid models.
Table 1 Summary of presented
GWT-inspired architectures
Name
Year
Maturity
Peculiarities
LIDA
2009
Implementation
available
Accurately implements many GWT aspects. It is based on
cognitive cycles of comprehension, consciousness, and
action.
IS-GW
2005
Implementation
available
Two sensorimotor loops by means of which the action to be
performed is selected also from those simulated
(“imagined”) internally by the model
CERA-CRANIUM
2009
Implementation
available
Four hierarchical layers, two workspaces. Consciousness is
at the top layer and knows only a high level
representation about the next action
CTM - Conscious
Touring
Machine
2020
Ready for
implementa-
tion
All processors in the model are unconscious. Local links can
be generated between processors to speed up the
processing of certain requests
GNW - Global
Neuronal
Workspace
1998
Implementation
available
Several agglomerates of neurons scattered in different areas
in order to create a distributed workspace rather than a
single central unit
129
Curr Robot Rep (2021) 2:125–131

Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di
Palermo within the CRUI-CARE Agreement.
Declarations
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent
This article does not
contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of
the authors.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, pro-
vide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were
made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Papers of particular interest, published recently, have been
highlighted as:
• Of importance
1.
Chella A, Cangelosi A, Metta G, Bringsjord S. Editorial:
Consciousness in humanoid robots. Front Robotics AI. 2019;6.
https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2019.00017.
2.
Baars BA. Cognitive theory of consciousness. Cambridge Univ
Press; 1988.
3.
Baars B, Franklin S, Consciousness I. Computational: the LIDA
model of global workspace theory. Int J Machine Consciousness.
2009;01:23–32. https://doi.org/10.1142/S1793843009000050.
4.
Franklin S, Strain S, Snaider J, McCall R, Faghihi U. Global
workspace theory, its LIDA model and the underlying neurosci-
ence. Biol Inspired Cognitive Architect. 2012;1:32–43. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bica.2012.04.001.
5.
Franklin S, Madl T, D'Mello S, Snaider JLIDA. A systems-level
Architecture for cognition, emotion, and learning. IEEE Trans
Autonomous Mental Develop. 2014;6:19–41. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TAMD.2013.2277589.
6.
Snaider J, McCall R, Franklin S. The LIDA framework as a general
tool for AGI. Artificial Gen Intell. 2011;133–42. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-22887-2_14.
7.
Dehaene S, Kerszberg M, Changeux J. A neuronal model of a
global workspace in effortful cognitive tasks. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
1998;95:14529–34. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.24.14529.
8.
Dehaene S, Sergent C, Changeux J. A neuronal network model
linking subjective reports and objective physiological data during
conscious perception. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2003;100:8520–5.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1332574100.
9.
Dehaene S, Changeux J, Naccache L. The global neuronal
workspace model of conscious access: from neuronal architectures
to clinical applications. Res Perspect Neurosci. 2011;55–84. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-18015-6_4.
10.
Arrabales R, Ledezma Espino A, Sanchis de Miguel A. CERA-
CRANIUM: a test bed for machine consciousness research. 2009.
11.• Blum M, Blum L. A theoretical computer science perspective on
consciousness. arXiv:2011.09850 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/
2011.09850 2020 This study theorise a simple, clean and well
designed architecture of consciousness from the theoretical
computer science point of view.
12.
Singh A, Singh S. Brain-mind dyad, human experience, the con-
sciousness tetrad and lattice of mental operations: and further. The
need to integrate knowledge from diverse disciplines. Mens Sana
Monographs. 2011;9:6. https://doi.org/10.4103/0973-1229.77412.
13.• Dehaene S, Lau H, Kouider S. What is consciousness, and could
machines have it? Science. 2017;358:486–92. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.aan8871 This study correlates the neural science
aspect of consciousness with the current machine
implementations of it outlining their incongruities.
14.
Baars B. Theater of consciousness. 1997. https://doi.org/10.1093/
acprof:oso/9780195102659.001.1.
15.
Michel M, Fleming S, Lau H, Lee A, Martinez-Conde S,
Passingham R, et al. An informal internet survey on the current
state of Consciousness science. Front Psychol. 2018;9. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02134.
16.
Baars B. The conscious access hypothesis: origins and recent evi-
dence. Trends Cognitive Sci. 2002;6:47–52. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S1364-6613(00)01819-2.
17.
Newman J, Baars B, Cho SA. Neural global workspace model for
conscious attention. Neural Netw. 1997;10:1195–206. https://doi.
org/10.1016/s0893-6080(97)00060-9.
18.
Bao C, Fountas Z, Olugbade T, Bianchi-Berthouze N. Multimodal
Data Fusion based on the Global Workspace Theory. Proc 2020 Int
Conf Multimod Interact 2020;414–422.
19.
Ng K, Du Z, Ng G. DSO Cognitive Architecture: Implementation
and Validation of the Global Workspace Enhancement. Artificial
Gen Intell 2018;151–161. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
97676-1_15.
20.
Shanahan M. A cognitive architecture that combines internal sim-
ulation with a global workspace. Conscious Cognit. 2006;15:433–
49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2005.11.005.
21.
Arrabales R. Inner speech generation in a video game non-player
character: from explanation to self? Intl J Mach Consciousness.
2012;04:367–81. https://doi.org/10.1142/S1793843012400215.
22.
Hingston PA. Turing test for computer game bots. IEEE Trans
Computation Intell AI Games. 2009;1:169–86. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TCIAIG.2009.2032534.
23.
MacLeod C. Half a century of research on the Stroop effect: an
integrative review. Psychol Bull. 1991;109:163–203. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0033-2909.109.2.163.
24.
Shanahan M. A spiking neuron model of cortical broadcast and
competition. Conscious Cognition. 2008;17:288–303. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.concog.2006.12.005.
25.
Connor D, Shanahan M. A simulated global neuronal workspace
with stochastic wiring. In AAAI Fall Symposium: AI and
Consciousness. 2007;43–48. https://www.aaai.org/Library/
Symposia/Fall/2007/fs07-01-008.php
130
Curr Robot Rep (2021) 2:125–131

26.
Whyte C. Integrating the global neuronal workspace into the frame-
work of predictive processing: towards a working hypothesis.
Conscious Cogn. 2019;73:102763. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
concog.2019.102763.
27.
Whyte C, Smith R. The predictive global neuronal workspace: a
formal active inference model of visual consciousness. Progress in
Neurobiology. 2020;101918. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.
2020.101918.
28.
Prakash R, Prakash O, Prakash S, Abhishek P, Gandotra S. Global
workspace model of consciousness and its electromagnetic corre-
lates. Ann Indian Acad Neurol. 2008;11:146. https://doi.org/10.
4103/0972-2327.42933.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
131
Curr Robot Rep (2021) 2:125–131
