RESEARCH ARTICLE
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to
Human Cerebral Organoids
Matthew Owen1,2, Zirui Huang2,3, Catherine Duclos4,5,6,7, Andrea Lavazza8,9
, Matteo Grasso10 and
Anthony G. Hudetz2,3
1Philosophy Department, Yakima Valley College, Yakima, WA, USA
2Center for Consciousness Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
3Department of Anesthesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
4Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada
5Department of Neuroscience, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada
6Centre for Advanced Research in Sleep Medicine, Centre intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux (CIUSSS) du
Nord-de-l’île-de-Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada
7CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholars Program, Toronto, ON, Canada
8Centro Universitario Internazionale, Arezzo, Italy
9University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
10Center for Sleep and Consciousness, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
Corresponding author: Matthew Owen; Email: matthewkeithowen@gmail.com
Abstract
Organoids and specifically human cerebral organoids (HCOs) are one of the most relevant novelties in the
field of biomedical research. Grown either from embryonic or induced pluripotent stem cells, HCOs can be
used as in vitro three-dimensional models, mimicking the developmental process and organization of the
developing human brain. Based on that, and despite their current limitations, it cannot be assumed that they
will never at any stage of development manifest some rudimentary form of consciousness. In the absence of
behavioral indicators of consciousness, the theoretical neurobiology of consciousness being applied to
unresponsive brain-injured patients can be considered with respect to HCOs. In clinical neurology, it is
difficult to discern a capacity for consciousness in unresponsive brain-injured patients who provide no
behavioral indicators of consciousness. In such scenarios, a validated neurobiological theory of conscious-
ness, which tells us what the neural mechanisms of consciousness are, could be used to identify a capacity for
consciousness. Like the unresponsive patients that provide a diagnostic difficulty for neurologists, HCOs
provide no behavioral indicators of consciousness. Therefore, this article discusses how three prominent
neurobiological theories of consciousness apply to human cerebral organoids. From the perspective of the
Temporal Circuit Hypothesis, the Global Neuronal Workspace Theory, and the Integrated Information
Theory, we discuss what neuronal structures and functions might indicate that cerebral organoids have a
neurobiological capacity to be conscious.
Keywords: human cerebral organoids; consciousness; neurobiology
Introduction
Human cerebral organoids (HCOs) are arguably one of the most promising recent advancements in
neuroscience. Insofar as these cerebral organoids accurately model human brain development, they
might yield answers to long-standing neurobiological questions with clinical implications and new
© The Author(s), 2023. Published by Cambridge University Press. This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction,
provided the original article is properly cited.
Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics (2024), 33: 4, 473–493
doi:10.1017/S0963180123000543
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

neurological treatments.1,2 Simultaneously, the more HCOs replicate the human brain, the more they
will elicit questions about whether they could be conscious in some way. Questions about whether HCOs
could ever be conscious and how we could ever know, despite their inability to communicate, are
certainly cerebral questions but not necessarily novel. They reflect an epistemic challenge neuroscientists
and neurologists began wrestling with well before the development of cerebral organoids.
The fundamental difficulty in discerning the presence or absence of consciousness is far from limited
to HCOs. In all creatures from primitive animals to primates, we rely on an observation of purposeful
behavior as a surrogate marker of consciousness. Even in humans, we infer conscious awareness from
behavior.3 In clinical neurology, consciousness is especially challenging to discern when brain-injured
patients are noncommunicative and unresponsive.4,5,6 Central nervous system lesions can prevent motor
activity, such as spontaneous speech, body movements, or purposeful response to stimuli, the lack of
which could be mistaken for unconsciousness. The possibility of awareness without responsiveness has
led to the concept of covert consciousness, or cognitive–motor dissociation.7,8,9,10,11 A similar case can be
made when patients undergo general anesthesia.12,13,14,15
It has been proposed that a behaviorally unresponsive subject might provide neuronal responses, such
as those assessed by neuroimaging, to questions, thus indicating consciousness.16,17,18,19 Yet, it is possible
that damage to the sensory systems could still preclude a covertly conscious person from sensing external
commands intended to elicit a neuronal response. To overcome this impasse, theoretical frameworks
about the neural mechanisms of consciousness have been applied to the epistemic challenge of
diagnosing unresponsive, noncommunicative patients.20,21,22,23 The rationale for this approach is that
a valid theory about the neural mechanisms that correspond to consciousness could provide an empirical
indicator of consciousness in the absence of any other indicators, such as a response or an intentional
behavior. This article applies this theoretical approach to HCOs, which are further introduced in the
following section along with our overall objectives and the neurobiological theories we will apply to
HCOs in the subsequent sections.
HCOs and Neurobiology of Consciousness
Like the consciousness of unresponsive brain-injured patients difficult to assess with standard clinical
methods, human cerebral organoids are incapable of providing an indication of consciousness in the
form of responses or behavior analogous to those produced by humans and other complex organisms. A
human cerebral organoid consists of neurons that connect to networks and self-organize into structures
of different cell types, resembling brain regions in early development.24 Consisting of up to tens of
millions of neurons developed from either embryonic or induced pluripotent stem cells (see Figure 1), an
Figure 1. Human cerebral organoid development. A human cerebral organoid is a three-dimensional spheroid consisting of neurons
developed from human pluripotent stem cells (a). The neurons multiply, forming an embryoid body (b) that then self-organizes and
differentiates (c). The growth of a cerebral organoid in vitro can be guided (d-bottom) using molecules and growth factors or it can be
unguided (d-top). An unguided cerebral organoid often has heterogeneous cellular tissues resembling various brain regions in one
organoid. A guided organoid can be generated to resemble a specific brain region composed of a specific type of cellular tissue in one
organoid. Multiple organoids can be combined to form an assembloid (e). Guided organoids resembling particular brain regions can
be combined to form an assembloid intended to model interactions between distinct brain regions.
474
Matthew Owen et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HCO that is a few millimeters in size can provide a 3D model of human brain development.25,26 Unlike
the human brain that exists as a part of a whole human organism and is protected by bone tissue, HCOs
are grown in vitro. As an isolated entity not obscured by the skull, an HCO provides a clear window into
the development as well as maldevelopment of neuroanatomy and neurophysiology in the brain.27 There
are questions about the extent to which HCOs truly model the human brain.28 Nevertheless, to the extent
that HCOs resemble the structures and functions of the human brain in its early stages of development,
they provide significant promise for neurological progress.29,30
At the same time, however, the more HCOs model or replicate the human brain, the organ
corresponding to our conscious mental lives, the question of whether they can be conscious becomes
more pressing.31,32,33 This question is significant to the ethical development and use of
HCOs.34,35,36,37,38,39,40 Yet, like the unresponsive brain-injured patients presenting a diagnostic chal-
lenge in neurology, HCOs are incapable of providing any behavioral or communicative indicators of
consciousness. However, unlike unresponsive brain-injured patients, HCOs do not have prior histories
of providing clear indicators of consciousness through interpersonal communication and intentional
behaviors. Considering the complete lack of any behavioral or communicative indicators of conscious-
ness from HCOs, it is difficult to imagine what else about HCOs could possibly indicate the presence or
lack of consciousness, except their neuroanatomy and neurophysiology. Therefore, it is reasonable to
consider how the theoretical frameworks in the neurobiology of consciousness that are being applied to
diagnosing unresponsive brain-injured patients could apply to HCOs.41,42 Although such theories may
be principally aimed at identifying empirically observable neural structures and functions that corre-
spond to consciousness in the human brain, they might reveal the only empirically observable markers
researchers have to work with when attempting to decipher whether HCOs have a capacity to be
conscious.
It is worth considering that a recent study showed for the first time that cortical organoids
generated from induced pluripotent stem cells can spontaneously develop periodic and regular
oscillatory network electrical activity that resembles the electroencephalography (EEG) patterns of
preterm babies.43 A machine learning model based on a preterm newborn’s EEG (ranging from 24 to
38 weeks) features was able to predict the organoid culture’s age based on the electrical activity of the
organoid itself. These results are surely relevant but by no means indicate that the recorded patterns
of activity give rise to the same subjective states as can be believed to have originated in preterm
babies.44 In another study, researchers managed to visualize in cortical spheroids synchronized and
non-synchronized activities in networks and connections between individual neurons.45 The mani-
festation of a synchronized neural activity can be the basis for various relevant cognitive functions.
Relatedly, Kagan et al. claim to have “demonstrated that a single layer of in vitro cortical neurons can
self-organize activity to display intelligent and sentient behavior when embodied in a simulated game-
world.”46
One can reasonably question whether terms such as sentience are being used in this context
accurately, analogously, or hyperbolically. Nevertheless, while we are still in the relatively early stages
of HCO development, now is the time to preemptively do all we can to responsibly consider the
implications of HCO development with respect to their capacity for consciousness. Hence, this article
outlines how three neurobiological theories of consciousness apply to HCOs. To be clear, however, it
will not answer the question of whether HCOs are conscious. In this vein, it should be pointed out
that a strong disagreement exists in the scientific community, where many researchers, bioethicists,
and neuroethicists consider the emergence of consciousness in HCOs to be unlikely, while others
think it is a hypothesis that should be taken into account.47 So, our article aims at offering a more
nuanced theoretical framework within which one can place different views on the topic and assess the
empirical findings. Although this article addresses a topic of great importance to bioethics and
neuroethics regarding the research development and use of HCOs, it should be noted that providing
ethical guidelines is not our focus. We are concerned specifically with what three neurobiological
theories predict are the neuronal structures and functions that enable consciousness, and what this
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids
475
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

means for HCOs with respect to their potential neurobiological capacity to be conscious. This can
have significant ethical implications for the research development and use of HCOs, which is why it is
important to address the issue. Yet, the aim of this article is not to spell out such ethical
implications.48,49
This article surveys what three prominent neurobiological theories of consciousness predict are the
neuronal structures and functions in the human brain that enable consciousness and explores the
implications for HCOs.50 We here assume consciousness generally corresponds to brain structure and
activity, and apply to HCOs theoretical predictions from the Temporal Circuit Hypothesis, Global
Neuronal Workspace Theory, and Integrated Information Theory about the neural correlate of being
conscious versus unconscious.51,52 This is often called the full neural correlate of consciousness (full
NCC) and can be described as the minimal neuronal mechanisms that are together physically
sufficient for consciousness.53,54 The theories discussed here share similarities but differ in how they
understand consciousness, which is notoriously difficult to define (see Table 1).55,56 Correspondingly,
each theory makes unique predictions about the full NCC (see Table 2). Our intention is to outline
each theory and its applicability to HCOs in a manner accessible to specialists in various disciplines
relevant to organoid research and development. Hence, there are elements of each theory left out,
while representative works well worth further study for greater detail are referenced. There are
multiple theories we do not have space to consider.57,58 And our focus on the three theories
considered here is not only because they provide examples of theories based on distinct, empirically
testable understandings of consciousness, but also due to our own familiarity with each theory based
on our prior research.
Our current aim is not to evaluate, defend, or critique (as many other works do) the neurobiological
theories of consciousness outlined and applied later to HCOs. Yet, a thorough discussion of the
applicability of the theories to HCOs would be deficient without also highlighting potential weaknesses
of each theory in terms of their applicability to HCOs. It cannot be assumed that even if a theory
accurately describes the full NCC in the human brain that it must directly apply to human cerebral
organoids. Hence, the foregoing sections not only discuss how each theory might apply to HCOs but also
particular challenges concerning their application to HCOs.
Table 1. Describing consciousness
There is no single authoritative definition of consciousness. Yet, there are three prominent
ways consciousness is described. Each presupposes a mental state that requires more or less
properties to truly count as conscious.
Theory that favors
description
Awareness
Description: Consciousness is a mental representation, or
awareness, persons have of their environment.
Example: When a patient hears a nurse’s voice.
Notice this requires the ability to sense one’s environment and
have a mental representation of it.
Temporal Circuit
Hypothesis
Access consciousness
Description: Consciousness is mental content that is
accessible for functions like rational thought,
communication, or intentional behavior.
Example: A memory that is recalled when describing an
event.
Notice this requires mental content that is available for
mentally involved functions.
Global Neuronal
Workspace Theory
Phenomenal consciousness
Description: Consciousness is experience, the felt sensation of
what it is like to be in a particular mental state.
Example: What it feels like to be depressed or to be happy.
Notice this requires the internal ability to feel, but not the ability
to sense the environment nor think or intentionally act.
Integrated Information
Theory
476
Matthew Owen et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Table 2. Neurobiological theories and human cerebral organoids
Theory
Emphasizes
awareness, access, or
phenomenal
consciousness
Predicted neuronal correlate
of being conscious
Application to HCOs
Unique question raised
Temporal Circuit Hypothesis
Awareness
Consciousness is enabled by a
temporal architecture involving a
back-and-forth dance of the inner
self and outer world representations
mediated by attentional switching.
This is supported by spatiotemporal
dynamics of brain activity that
displays a shifting balance between
the default mode network (DMN) and
the dorsal attention network (DAN)
as governed by their regulator, the
anterior insula.
A conscious HCO would include an
inner self that is aware of its
environment. This would involve
representations of the environment
that are conscious content due to a
shifting balance between two
systems governed by a temporal
circuit. In the mature brain, the two
systems are the DMN and DAN,
whereas the regulator is the anterior
insula. If there were the same
systems or perhaps different systems
that nevertheless performed the
same functions in an HCO, the
neurobiological conditions for
consciousness would be met if the
DAN (or whatever performs its
functional role) could receive
representations of the environment.
Could artificial sensory
mechanisms be attached to
the HCO, making
representations of its
environment possible?
Global Neuronal Workspace Theory
Access consciousness
In the brain, there is a workspace that
stores information and makes it
globally available to all the
specialized systems throughout the
brain. Whatever perception or
thought that comes to occupy the
workspace is conscious as it is
projected to the systems throughout
the brain. The workspace consists of
long-range cortical neurons that
comprise a network capable of
reciprocal projections, which can
receive information from sensory
cortices and send projections to
other cortical areas involved in
working memory, language, and
intentional action.
A conscious HCO would have a global
workspace that stores information
and specialized systems that the
information is made available to, and
neurons connecting the workspace
to all the specialized systems,
making the information available to
each system. In the mature brain, a
marker of consciousness is a global
broadcast of information involving
the activity of a prefrontal–parietal
network of long-range cortical
neurons corresponding with activity
in high-level sensory cortices
receiving the broadcast. If an HCO
had a workspace that could receive a
percept from a specialized system
In the absence of sensory
information gained via sense
organs, what type of
information could enter the
workspace and be made
accessible to specialized
systems?
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids
477
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Table 2. Continued
Theory
Emphasizes
awareness, access, or
phenomenal
consciousness
Predicted neuronal correlate
of being conscious
Application to HCOs
Unique question raised
and then make it available to every
other specialized system in the HCO,
it would be neurobiologically
capable of being conscious.
Integrated Information Theory
Phenomenal
consciousness
The physical substrate of
consciousness exemplifies a
maximally irreducible cause–effect
structure that is the integrated
information associated with
consciousness. The intrinsic causal
structure is predicted to be specified
by the posterior cerebral cortex in a
temporal–parietal–occipital “hot
zone” where coalitions of neurons
are sufficiently structured for
reciprocal projections that manifest
intrinsic causation.
A conscious HCO would have a coalition
of neurons that are sufficiently
structured for reciprocal projections
that specify a maximally irreducible
cause–effect structure. It is predicted
that such neuronal coalition(s) exist
in the temporal–parietal–occipital
“hot zone” because the localized
neuroarchitecture is sufficient for
manifesting the maximally
irreducible cause–effect structure. If
an HCO had a set of neurons capable
of reciprocal projections that would
specify a maximally irreducible
cause–effect structure, it would be
neurobiologically capable of being
conscious.
What could it possibly feel like to
have a phenomenal conscious
experience without any
sensory input?
478
Matthew Owen et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Temporal Circuit Hypothesis
The Temporal Circuit Hypothesis (TCH) proposes that the neuronal basis of consciousness is a temporal
architecture of representational brain processes that change dynamically and probabilistically.59,60
These processes are supported by several functional brain networks, of which two networks play critical
roles. According to the TCH, consciousness emerges from the dynamic relation of two systems that relate
to the self and the environment, of which both are necessary. An agent (either a human or a nonhuman
being) is assumed to have the ability to accurately represent its environment and form abstractions and
concepts, but such representations or concepts in themselves do not endow the agent with awareness.
Being conscious (or aware) also requires the agent to represent itself in relation to aspects of the world,
either external to the agent or internal. In this sense, the crucial step in the emergence of consciousness is
not only perception (i.e., conscious states with a specific content) but the percepts being our percepts.
From this particular perspective presented by the TCH, the self is vital because it is the subject that is
aware of the environment, and without a subject that is aware, there is no awareness and therefore no
consciousness.61,62,63,64,65
The TCH anchors the “self-environment” interaction in a reciprocal balance between two opposing
cortical systems embedded in the spatiotemporal dynamics of neural activity. Starting with a real-life
example, imagine driving to work along the same route you take each day. Your mind wanders from one
thing to the next. Suddenly, a car cuts you off, and wandering thoughts immediately vanish as all your
attention focuses on maneuvering the steering wheel to avoid a collision. As we go about our waking lives,
our stream of consciousness typically cycles through many such alternations between introspection and
outward attention throughout the day. This back-and-forth “dance” between inward and outward
mental states happens naturally and automatically. Evidence from noninvasive functional neuroimaging
studies has pointed to two distinct brain networks that mediate the stream of consciousness, an internally
directed system—default mode network (DMN)—and an externally directed system—dorsal attention
network (DAN).66,67,68,69,70 The former corresponds with inward focus on ourselves and conceptually
guided cognition, and the latter corresponds with our awareness of the environment around us. In the
conscious brain, the two systems are in a dynamic balance, sliding back and forth, but both are there to
some degree.
Recent work reveals how cyclical patterns of brain activity and how the push–pull relationship
between the DMN and DAN may differ between conscious and unconscious individuals.71 In the
conscious brain, the dynamic switching of networks including the DMN and DAN occurs along a set of
structured transition trajectories conceived of as a “temporal circuit.” Thus, the conscious brain passes
through intermediate states between the DMN and DAN, rather than flipping instantaneously between
these two. In contrast, in the unconscious brain, there are fewer trajectories reaching the DMN and DAN.
In other words, in subjects who were either under anesthesia or unconscious due to neuronal injury, both
the DMN and DAN are visited less often, meaning that the number of times they are activated within the
cycling patterns of networks is reduced. Thus, consciousness relies on a temporal circuit of dynamic
brain activity representing balanced reciprocal accessibility of functional brain states. The absence of this
“give-and-take” relationship of the two systems is common to any form of diminished consciousness.
However, its presence corresponds to full consciousness, including both the external and internal aspects
corresponding to the two systems.
The dynamic shift between the DMN and DAN is regulated by a critical brain structure, the anterior
insula, a central component of the brain’s salience and ventral attention networks.72,73,74,75 It seems to
identify and prioritize salient stimuli in the stream of continuous sensory information and send signals to
systems responsible for the allocation of top–down attentional resources to the relevant sensory
representations.76,77,78 Anatomically, the anterior insula is composed of unique clusters of large
spindle-shaped pyramidal neurons in layer 5, called von Economo neurons that establish long-distance,
fast relay of information throughout the cortex.79,80 These neurons play a role in spatial and self-
awareness, and their abnormality was historically associated with psychiatric disorders.81 Interestingly,
they have been found only in species that are able to pass the standard mirror test for self-recognition
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids
479
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

such as elephants and macaques.82,83 Importantly, the dysfunction of the anterior insula during
anesthesia disables the cyclic DMN–DAN transitions.84
Overall, the TCH proposes that consciousness is enabled by a temporal architecture involving a back-
and-forth dance of representations about the inner self and one’s environment mediated by attentional
switching. This is principally supported by the observed spatiotemporal dynamics of brain activity that
displays a shifting balance between the DMN and DAN as governed by their regulator, the anterior
insula.
The TCH seems to imply several neurobiological conditions for consciousness in HCOs. If an HCO
were conscious, it would involve an inner self that is aware of its environment. This would involve
representations of the environment that are conscious content given a shifting balance between two
systems governed by a temporal circuit. In the mature human brain, the two systems are the DMN and
DAN, whereas the regulator is the anterior insula. Furthermore, the DAN receives inputs from sensory
systems with information from the surrounding environment. If an HCO had the same systems
performing the same functions, the neurobiological conditions for consciousness would be met. Yet,
it might also be possible for different systems to perform the same functions and therefore meet the
neurobiological conditions. Nevertheless, when comparing the implications of the TCH for HCOs to the
following two theories, readers will notice that a distinguishing feature of the TCH is that there is
explicitly an inner self aware of its environment, which is enabled by a back-and-forth switching between
an internally directed brain system and an externally directed brain system.
A more obvious challenge of applying the TCH to HCOs is the reality that isolated cerebral organoids
do not have the typical conduits of sensory inputs to the brain, such as organs involved in hearing or
smelling. A more difficult challenge of applying the TCH pertains to the self that is aware, the subject of
experiences, which is the bearer of consciousness. When studying neural correlates of consciousness in
human subjects, it is often justifiably presupposed that there is a subject, or self, who commonly provides
subjective reports of conscious experiences.85 But with respect to HCOs, it cannot be presupposed
whether the self is or is not present. There are many examples of natural biological organisms devoid of a
self (e.g., flowers and trees) and engineered biological organisms devoid of a self, such as kidney and
cardiac organoids. Determining whether an HCO is a biological organism like the human brain or body
in which a subject is present would seem necessary for the application of the TCH to an HCO. Yet, this
would be an immensely complex task, especially in the absence of any subjective reports or history of
such from a noncommunicative HCO.86 While this is the primary challenge for the TCH, it will become
apparent that each theory will have its own hurdles to overcome when it comes to applying the theory
to HCOs.
Global Neuronal Workspace Theory
The theoretical neurobiologist Bernard Baars proposed the Global Workspace Theory in the 1980s.87
Baars posited that within the brain, there is a workspace that stores information and makes it globally
available to all the specialized systems throughout the brain. Since the workspace’s capacity is limited,
information signals compete to be the globally available representation in the workspace. Whatever
perception or thought that comes to occupy the workspace is conscious as it is projected to the systems
throughout the brain. The percepts or thoughts that do not make it into the workspace, and therefore are
not globally available, are not conscious.
Contemporary advocates of the Global Workspace Theory have applied it to the neurophysiology of
the neocortex under the new name the Global Neuronal Workspace (GNW) Theory.88,89,90 Accordingly,
a marker of consciousness is a global broadcast of information involving the activity of a prefrontal–
parietal network of long-range cortical neurons corresponding with activity in high-level sensory
cortices receiving the broadcast. Such activity indicates that the information is globally available for
various functional processes such as speech, memory, or action, and thus, it is conscious content, per the
GNW. If, however, there are no long-range projections and neuronal activity is merely localized in
specific areas, that would indicate there is no global broadcast of information, making it available to
480
Matthew Owen et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

specialized systems throughout the brain, and therefore, consciousness is not present. After all, according
to the GNW, “Broadcasting implies that the information in the workspace becomes available to many
local processors, and it is the wide accessibility of this information that is hypothesized to constitute
conscious experience.”91
On this theoretical framework, content is either globally available, and therefore conscious, or it is not.
Several factors make such global availability possible. Of central importance is the global workspace that
receives, stores, and sends information. In addition, there are specialized systems that send content to the
workspace and to which the globally broadcast content is made available. Neurons dubbed “GNW
neurons” receive information from the specialized systems and transmit information to the specialized
systems when it is globally broadcast.92 While what constitutes conscious experience on the GNW is the
content or information globally broadcast, there is also content that does not become conscious content
because it does not enter the workspace and become globally available. Such content can still affect
behavior but not consciously. It is only the specific content that exceeds a threshold, igniting a global
broadcast of the content as GNW neurons receive the corresponding signal from a specialized system
and recurrently transmits it to all other specialized systems.93 When that global broadcast is triggered,
there is a conscious experience with accessible content. Note the requirement for recurrent signaling in
the brain to enable conscious perception is also the essential feature of the Recurrent Processing Theory
of consciousness.94,95
If an HCO had a workspace that could receive a percept from a specialized system and then make it
available to every other specialized system in the HCO, it would be neurobiologically capable of being
conscious. Therefore, to find out whether an HCO is neurobiologically capable of being conscious, we
would want to ask whether it has the neuroanatomy and neurophysiology for a workspace, specialized
systems, and projections between the workspace and all the systems. Then, to find out whether it is
manifesting the neurobiological condition for consciousness, we would want to find out whether
projections are being sent from the workspace to all the specialized systems.
In a fully formed human brain, the workspace consists of long-range cortical neurons that comprise a
network capable of reciprocal projections, which can receive information from sensory cortices and send
projections to other cortical areas involved in working memory, language, and intentional action. The
GNW does not assume that all physical systems that are conscious will have the exact same physical
mechanisms that fulfill the roles involved in a global broadcast of information in the human brain.
Accordingly, it is possible for computers to be conscious, per the GNW.96,97 The difference maker for a
computer’s physical capacity to be conscious would be whether there are mechanisms in a computer
capable of a global broadcast. The same is true of HCOs.
If there were the exact same neuroanatomy and neurophysiology in an HCO that makes a global
broadcast possible in the fully formed human brain, then it would be capable of meeting the neurobi-
ological condition for consciousness. However, just as it is conceivable that another physical system like a
computer could have different mechanisms than human brains that fulfill the same functional roles, thus
satisfying the physical conditions for consciousness, it is conceivable that an HCO could have different
mechanisms that fulfill the same roles. Or, they might have the same mechanisms, but not as fully
developed. In other words, the neural mechanisms in HCOs capable of a global broadcast might be
different from those in the mature human brain. Nevertheless, there would need to be something that
fulfills the role of the workspace and something that fulfills the role of the specialized subsystems that
send information to and receive information from the workspace.
There is, however, an epistemic difference between the brain of a healthy adult and an HCO that
creates a hurdle. The former’s specialized systems are recognized by their association with certain
behaviors or functions of a human subject. For example, Broca’s area is known to be associated with
speech because we can associate activity in that area with a subject’s speech. Examples could easily be
multiplied where specialized brain areas are specialized precisely because they correspond to a specific
function of a subject. But in the case of HCOs, functions such as hearing, seeing, or speaking—which are
associated with specialized systems in the mature human brain—are absent. The only information we
have to make inferences from is the degree to which the HCO’s neuroanatomy and neurophysiology
reflect that of the specialized systems and the workspace in a mature brain. Yet, even if HCOs directly
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids
481
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

replicate a mature human brain, things are still complicated by the fact that specialized systems in the
human brain perform specific functions that are not necessarily isolated to the brain alone. Rather, they
can be the result of receiving input from other biological parts of the whole organism outside the brain,
such as sensory organs. They can also contribute to functions of other biological parts—just think again
of Broca’s area associated with speech involving the mouth. These issues raise difficult questions.
For one, it must be asked whether the isolated functions in an HCO are truly the same functions as
those in a normal brain, which are not isolated but rather part of a larger system with interacting parts.
This question about the nature of the neurophysiological processes in HCOs will require an answer in
order to discern whether HCOs meet the neurobiological conditions for consciousness from the
perspective of the GNW. Moreover, it must be asked what kind of information could enter the workspace
given that an HCO is an isolated cerebral entity devoid of sense organs and therefore receives no sensory
information about the external environment (see, however, the concluding section). Will the informa-
tion only be abstract information? If so, is it only the systems that correspond to abstract information
processing that count as specialized systems that send and receive information? There is also a related
question pertaining to the GNW generally that is more difficult to answer when applying the theory to
HCOs: that is, what makes some neural states and activity correspond to information of a specific kind
(e.g., sensory information)? These are the sort of questions that arise from the perspective of the GNW,
which emphasizes access consciousness. The third theory to be considered understands phenomenal
consciousness as fundamental to being conscious.
Integrated Information Theory
The Integrated Information Theory (IIT) was proposed by the neuroscientist and psychiatrist Giulio
Tononi, shortly after the turn of the century.98,99 The IIT is based on five axioms about the nature of
consciousness, which is understood as subjective experience that is phenomenal conscious-
ness.100,101,102,103 From the axioms about consciousness, five postulates are inferred about the nature
of the physical substrate of consciousness (PSC).
The first axiom, intrinsic existence, says consciousness exists and is intrinsic to the subject of the
conscious experience who has direct epistemic access to it. Based on this axiom, it is postulated that the
PSC must exist and produce intrinsic causal effects upon itself. The second axiom, composition, says
conscious experience is structured in that it has phenomenal distinctions. To grasp what a phenomenal
distinction is, one can imagine the conscious experience of observing a sunset, during which the sound of
a bird’s chirping is heard, the scent of freshly cut grass is smelt, and multiple colors are visually perceived.
Given such phenomenal distinctions, the IIT postulates that there are distinct constituent elements of the
PSC that have causal power upon the system, either by themselves or together with other elements. The
third axiom, information, says that consciousness is specific, and it is the way it is; consequently, each
experience is distinguished from other conscious experiences due to its distinct phenomenological
features. It is postulated from this that the PSC must have a cause–effect structure of a specific form that
makes it distinct from other possible structures. According to the fourth axiom, integration, a conscious
experience is a unified whole irreducible to the phenomenal distinctions within it. Thus, the IIT
postulates the cause–effect structure specified by the PSC must be unitary—that is, it must be irreducible
to the one specified by non-interdependent causal subsystems. The final axiom, exclusion, claims a
conscious experience is definite in its content and spatiotemporal grain. Therefore, the IIT postulates the
cause–effect structure exemplified by the PSC must also be definite, being specified by a definite set of
elements exhibiting maximal cause–effect power—neither less nor more—at a definite spatial and
temporal grain.
According to the IIT, the PSC in the human central nervous system specifies a structure that exhibits
maximal intrinsic cause–effect power.104 This maximally irreducible cause–effect structure is the
integrated information associated with consciousness, and as a structure that is theoretically possible
to measure, it is thought to provide a basis for measuring consciousness.105 The integrated information of
the IIT is referred to as Phi and is represented by Φ, with the vertical bar representing information and
482
Matthew Owen et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the circle representing integration.106 Since a single entity might have multiple manifestations of Φ, it is
important that it is the maximal Φ, which is the greatest manifestation of intrinsic causation among a
coalition of mechanisms in a system that is associated with consciousness. While the IIT’s axioms and
postulates concern human consciousness and the human nervous system, it has been argued that the
theory can be applied to other biological organisms and even more broadly to all conceivable manifes-
tations of consciousness.107
The primary prediction of the IIT is that maxima of Φ indicates consciousness, and therefore, the
ability to measure Φ would make it possible to detect consciousness and measure the degree to which it
is present. So, in a nervous system, the presence of consciousness will correspond with intrinsic
causation manifested by a coalition of neurons and by measuring the maximal manifestation of such
intrinsic causation you can measure the degree of consciousness. Furthermore, suppose there is no
spontaneous manifestation of Φ in the brain of a patient with a severe brain injury. A technique
inspired by the IIT can be used to measure the extent to which the brain maintains adequate
neurophysiology to manifest Φ. The Perturbational Complexity Index (PCI), a simplified, surrogate
measure of integrated information, reflects the response of the cortex, measured by electroencepha-
lography (EEG), when it is perturbed using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). The PCI reveals
the extent to which the brain has the neurophysiology needed for manifesting integrated information
in the form of intrinsic causation.108
Proponents of the IIT hypothesize that the full NCC in a mature human brain will be the subsystem
with maximal Φ and will be localized in the posterior cerebral cortex in a temporal–parietal–occipital
“hot zone.”109 The rationale for thinking the full NCC is in this posterior region is that this area has
coalitions of neurons sufficiently structured for recurrent projections and, thus, for manifesting high Φ.
When it comes to applying the IIT to HCOs, what matters is the rationale for this hypothesis about the
full NCC, not necessarily whether such a hot zone has been formed within the organoid. If there are
neurons in an HCO sufficiently structured for reciprocal projections that would manifest a global
maximum of Φ, then the HCO is capable of meeting the IIT’s neurobiological condition for conscious-
ness. When such reciprocal projections take place among the coalition of neurons, the neurobiological
conditions for being conscious are met.
If the technology were available for securing a PCI for HCOs, which is theoretically plausible, then we
could find out whether they have the neuroanatomy and neurophysiology sufficient for manifesting Φ.
Moreover, if we had the ability to measure Φ in HCOs, then we could know whether and to what extent
the neurobiological conditions for consciousness are being met.
In the context of considerations about HCOs, what noticeably distinguishes the IIT is that it permits
the possibility of minimal consciousness in strikingly simple physical systems, even something as simple
as a single photodiode.110,111 Some might see the IIT’s relatively liberal ascription of consciousness as a
strength, while others might see it as a shortcoming.112,113,114 It is worth mentioning, however, that the
GNW might also allow for quite simple systems, composed of just several units, to implement a global
workspace and therefore be conscious.115,116,117 Nevertheless, does the IIT’s generous ascription of
consciousness mean that an HCO consisting of just several million neurons is capable of the same
conscious experiences as a person with a fully developed human brain consisting of eighty-six billion
neurons? Although the number of neurons matters, it is not the most important factor. The key
condition is whether the neurons comprising an HCO include a coalition of neurons sufficiently
structured for manifesting Φ. If there is such a coalition, the HCO is capable of meeting the IIT’s
neurobiological condition for consciousness, and when it manifests maximal Φ, then it meets the
condition.
However, suppose that an HCO manifests a maximal Φ, and it is therefore inferred that the HCO is
conscious. Does this mean it is experiencing in the way that someone with a fully formed human brain
is? Per the IIT, the HCO is indeed conscious—but according to the IIT, consciousness is not all or
nothing. Rather, it comes in degrees. So, the HCO will be conscious to the same degree as a mature
human to the degree that the HCO is manifesting the same degree of Φ. An implication is that the less
HCOs are like fully formed human brains in their capacity to manifest Φ, the less they are capable of
being conscious to the degree mature humans are, and of having similar experiences. Yet, the more like
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids
483
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

human brains HCOs are in their capacity to manifest Φ, the more they are capable of being conscious
to the degree that mature humans are. Granted, it is hard to imagine what an HCO’s conscious
experience might be like when there is no input from sense organs. Nevertheless, there would be a
conscious experience of what it’s like to be an HCO, according to the IIT, even if imagining what
exactly it’s like brings us to the edge of our own empathy. Here, the IIT’s aim to not only measure the
degree of consciousness but also infer its content would become relevant since it would be important to
know whether the content includes undesirable states such as pain.118,119,120
Overall, according to the IIT, human cerebral organoids (and systems in general) are conscious if and
only if they exemplify a global maxima of Φ, and they experience pain if and only if their irreducible
cause–effect structure is composed of distinctions and relations mimicking the ones that systematically
correspond to pain when specified by the PSC in the human brain. The benefits of this claim are its
precision and that it provides a theoretical basis for detecting consciousness in HCOs. At the same time,
some might critique this element of the IIT on the grounds that it entails that not only human cerebral
organoids but also any other type of organoid (such as kidney organoids) could be conscious if and only if
they exemplify a global maxima of Φ. This seems to go against the grain of a key presupposition in the
overall discussion. That is, there is something unique about human cerebral organoids that makes them
possible candidates for consciousness—namely, their neuronal constitution as it resembles the human
brain. At this point, IIT theorists may have to either bite the bullet that kidney organoids could be
conscious or hope that it can be conclusively demonstrated that cortical neurons are the only cells
capable of exemplifying a global maxima of Φ.
If it were shown that kidney organoids manifest a global maxima of Φ and cerebral organoids do not,
that would be a counterintuitive result within a field that emphasizes the brain and its neuronal
constitution in relationship to consciousness. If, however, HCOs were shown to manifest a global
maxima of Φ and organoids devoid of neurons were shown to lack a global maxima of Φ, this might
suggest the IIT has identified a unique feature of neurons in the organ that corresponds to consciousness.
But it would also imply, from the standpoint of the IIT, that HCOs are conscious.
Discussion: Current Science and Future Progress
Having outlined three prominent neurobiological theories of consciousness and what they predict are
the neuronal conditions that enable consciousness, it is important to note that no one theory is widely
considered demonstrably true.121,122 The empirical research continues, and competitively so.123,124,125
There are also conceptual and empirical challenges that the theories must overcome. For example, Koch
critiques the GNW’s computational account of consciousness as he argues for the IIT, while Doerig et al.
use theorems from computational theory to argue that the IIT is either false or outside the domain of
science.126,127 Meanwhile, Sánchez-Cañizares calls for greater clarity regarding the IIT’s metaphysical
commitments as Bayne conceptually challenges its axiomatic foundation and Noel et al. raise an
empirical challenge.128,129,130 It is easy to find examples of objections to the prominent theories given
the amount of attention they receive. But each theory, notorious or not, has its own challenges to contend
with.
Additionally, the development of HCOs is well underway but far from the finish line. While the
ultimate objective might be a whole-brain organoid for comprehensive modeling of the brain’s
biological development and neurophysiology, there is a long way to go.131 Obstacles such as the
challenge of providing vascularization for organoids prohibit their development to more mature
stages.132,133,134 Despite current limitations, the theories outlined here can guide considerations and
prompt key questions concerning the neurobiological conditions for consciousness as organoid
development progresses and the underexplored physiology of neuronal circuits in HCOs is further
studied.135
While no theory of consciousness currently enjoys consensus confirmation, each theory can be used
to prompt important questions, some of which might be more germane to specific stages of organoid
development. Even in light of current neural tissue development, the IIT prompts the question of
484
Matthew Owen et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

whether in vitro cortical neurons can manifest intrinsic causation via recurrent excitation and
feedback loops.136 The IIT also leads to an interesting question pertinent to a tactic for providing
HCOs with vascularization. One approach is to implant them into a host animal brain resulting in
what are called chimeras, as depicted in Figure 2 .137 From the vantage point of the IIT, this maneuver
invites the question of whether the implanted HCO benefitting from the vascular system of the host
animal might be incorporated into a maximally irreducible causal structure in the host brain. This
would make the hitchhiking HCO part of the physical substrate of the host animal’s consciousness
(assuming it is conscious). Even if this is no more ethically suspect than an organ transplant, by
seriously reflecting on such issues, the scientific community can demonstrate ethical responsibility in
research that safeguards public trust.138,139 And exploring the implications of the different theories in
such scenarios might lead to fruitful questions that hone our development and understanding of the
theories.
For example, suppose it is possible in the case of chimeras that the host animal is conscious and the
HCO could become conscious. We could reasonably ask whether the HCO could have its own conscious
experience distinct from the animal’s conscious experience. From the perspective of the IIT, it might
seem that there are two possibilities. On the one hand, if the implanted HCO is part of the host animal’s
body, and specifically its brain, it seems that it could become part of the animal’s physical substrate of
consciousness. Given this, it could be said that the animal’s conscious experience corresponds to the
neuronal activity in the HCO. However, this would require the neural activity in the HCO being part of
the maximally irreducible causal structure in the host animal’s brain. After all, if the HCO is part of the
animal’s body, and specifically its brain, it could hypothetically manifest intrinsic causation that does not
correspond to consciousness. Because according to the IIT, it is only the maximally irreducible causal
structure in the brain that corresponds to consciousness. But this raises the question of what would make
the HCO part of the animal’s body rather than a stand-alone entity? Put differently, since a maximally
irreducible causal structure excludes all other causal structures specified by an overlapping subsystem, it
is vital to know what does and does not count as a part of the system. Likewise, from the perspective of the
GNW, what counts as a global broadcast of information also depends on the boundaries of the system
within which a broadcast is or is not global. Suppose an animal were conscious because there was a global
broadcast to all the specialized areas in its brain. If it had an HCO implanted into its brain and the HCO
developed specialized areas, would it be necessary for a broadcast in the animal’s brain to reach these
specialized areas in the HCO before it is conscious? If so, that would seem to be because the implanted
HCO is part of the animal’s brain. If not, that would seem to be because the implanted HCO is not part of
Figure 2. Human cerebral organoid and mouse chimera. To overcome a lack of vascularization that limits a human cerebral organoid’s
growth in vitro, it can be implanted into a mouse brain, producing a chimera. The mouse brain then provides vascularization for the
implanted human cerebral organoid. This raises various questions. For example, could the organoid grow to the extent that it
becomes sufficiently developed to manifest the neurobiological conditions for consciousness? If the mouse is conscious, could the
organoid become part of the physical substrate of the mouse’s consciousness?
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids
485
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the animal’s brain. Yet, what would make it part of (or not part of) the animal’s brain to which the
condition of a global broadcast applies?
Some might argue that such questions arising from such novel scenarios demonstrate how the
neurobiological theories are not sufficiently developed or specified to be applicable to possible conscious
systems beyond the human brain, such as HCOs.140,141 It would surely be unwise to simply assume the
theories apply as directly to an HCO as to a human brain. However, it does not follow that they cannot be
applicable to HCOs at all, and the only tools anyone can apply to any task are the tools they possess. If
there were a validated theory that was fully developed and specifically applied directly to all possible
instances of consciousness, we would be at the end goal of a major scientific project. Yet, that is not where
the scientific study of consciousness currently is. What we have to work with are the best theories to date.
And progress in the development of chimeras is not likely to wait for neurobiological theories of
consciousness to be perfectly honed. A recent study reports that HCOs transplanted into the somato-
sensory cortex of newborn athymic rats “extend axons throughout the rat brain” and developed mature
cell types that “integrate into sensory and motivation-related circuits.”142 Applying neurobiological
theories of consciousness to such novel issues can lead to their development not only when the theories
are shown to be useful but also if they are shown to have limitations. Asking the difficult questions about
how they apply to the most complicated conundrums in consciousness research is one way to reveal their
explanatory utility, or lack thereof.
In addition to chimeras, what are called assembloids are another novel creation in HCO research
worthy of consideration. The development of an organoid can be guided using molecules and growth
factors to grow a specific type of cell tissue composing an organoid that resembles a specific brain
region.143 Multiple guided organoids resembling specific brain regions can also be assembled and
connected by interneurons.144 From the perspective of the GNW, the ability to manufacture assem-
bloids prompts the question of whether specific parts of the brain that might serve as the global
workspace and other parts that could serve as specific specialized systems might be grown, assembled,
and interconnected in a way that the neuronal structures the GNW posits are preconditions for
consciousness would be present. A thorough consideration of such possibilities invites proponents of
the GNW to specify a threshold number of specialized systems needed for a global broadcast, and
whether as few as one or two would be sufficient. A question with details pertinent to the TCH can also
be asked if cellular tissue involved in sensing external stimuli is grown and connected to a cerebral
organoid. The relevance of such a question is increasing. It has already been reported that cerebral
organoids can assemble primitive light-sensitive optic vesicles, permitting interorgan interaction
studies and potentially direct inputs from the environment.145
As we conclude, let us offer a brief catalog of further theoretical questions worthy of future
considerations and study. In addition to the degree of similarity between the structures of HCOs and
those that correspond to consciousness in the human brain, according to the theories mentioned earlier,
what extent of similarity is needed to make plausible inferences about the capacity for consciousness?
Related to this, is the size and number of neurons something important, or is an isomorphism and similar
functionality between developing human brains and HCOs sufficient? Likewise, it is worth asking
whether consciousness comes in degrees or if it is an all-or-nothing property that is either fully present or
not present at all. If fetuses have rudimentary forms of sentience that differ from those experienced by
adult humans, could the same be true of HCOs?
It would also be immensely helpful to know whether we can devise empirical studies based on the
theoretical claims discussed before. An example is measuring the Perturbational Complexity Index
(PCI) in HCOs, as proposed by Lavazza and Massimini, which might yield a proxy for the presence of
a capacity for consciousness.146 At the same time, we will need to continually wrestle with the
question of whether empirical indicators in the human brain indicate the same phenomenon in
HCOs. For example, according to the GNW, long-range cortico-cortical functional connectivity
seems to be a key neurobiological condition for consciousness in the human brain. However, in HCOs
with a size of a few millimeters, these (centimeter) long connections are absent. Yet, the event-related
potential P300 has been deemed one of the neuronal markers when it comes to the detection of a
particular level of information available in the global workspace, and in particular the P3b, whereas
486
Matthew Owen et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the P3a component might be linked to automatic and nonconscious processes.147 Could the P300
wave indicate the same in cerebral organoids? Could specific neural activity that indicates a global
broadcast in the human brain be indicative of the same in an HCO? Or, should we expect a modified
indicator corresponding to the differences between the brain and a cerebral organoid? We cannot
assume a neuronal indicator in a healthy human subject indicates the same phenomenon in an
unresponsive brain-injured human patient without sufficient justification for thinking so.148,149 This
is even truer with respect to HCOs.
There is no reason to think the questions raised here will yield perspicuous answers. And the theories
discussed earlier may provide divergent answers that must be continually critically evaluated. However,
what is clear in light of the rapid development of HCOs is that now is the time to carefully consider the
difficult questions. To foster and aid considerations about the neurobiological capacity HCOs might
develop for consciousness, we have attempted to apply three theoretical predictions about the neuro-
biological conditions for consciousness to HCOs. Establishing which prediction is most viable could be
an important step toward eventually deciphering whether the neurobiological conditions for conscious-
ness are present in HCOs.
Acknowledgments. M.O. would like to thank Christopher Moraes for providing Figures 1 and 2 and for helpful discussions
pertaining to sections two and six.
Data availability statement. Data analyzed are available in supplementary sources.
Author contribution. M.O. drafted much of the article, while Z.H. and A.G.H. wrote and edited the third section. Z.H. and
A.G.H. also contributed to writing the first two sections and revising them with M.O. C.D. contributed to substantial discussion
of the article content with M.O. and helped conceptualize and revise the first and second sections. M.O., C.D., M.G., and
A.C.H. conceptually revised the fourth and fifth sections and the corresponding table. M.O. and M.G. edited the fifth section.
A.L. contributed to the drafting of and revising of the first, second, and sixth sections. All authors contributed to revising/editing
the manuscript and approved the final version.
Competing interest. The authors declare none.
Notes
1. Setiaa H, Muotri AR. Brain organoids as a model system for human neurodevelopment and disease.
Seminars in Cell and Developmental Biology 2019;95:93–7.
2. Sun N, Meng X, Liu Y, Song D, Jiang C, Cai J. Applications of brain organoids in neurodevelopment
and neurological diseases. Journal of Biomedical Science 2021;28:1–16.
3. Giacino JT, Kalmar K, Whyte J. The JFK coma recovery scale-revised: Measurement characteristics
and diagnostic utility. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 2004;85:2020–9.
4. Giacino JT, Fins JJ, Laureys S, Schiff ND. Disorders of consciousness after acquired brain injury:
The state of the science. Nature Reviews Neurology 2014;10:99–114.
5. Schnakers C, Hirsch M, Noé E, Llorens R, Lejeune N, Veeramuthu V, et al. Covert cognition in
disorders of consciousness: A meta-analysis. Brain Sciences 2020;10:1–11.
6. Wannez S, Heine L, Thonnard M, Gosseries O, Laureys S. The repetition of behavioral assessments
in diagnosis of disorders of consciousness. Annals of Neurology 2017;81:883–9.
7. Fernández-Espejo D, Rossit S, Owen AM. A thalamocortical mechanism for the absence of overt
motor behavior in covertly aware patients. JAMA Neurology 2015;72:1442–50.
8. Monti MM, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Coleman MR, Boly M, Pickard JD, Tshibanda L, et al. Willful
modulation of brain activity in disorders of consciousness. The New England Journal of Medicine
2010;362:579–89.
9. Owen AM, Coleman MR, Boly M, Davis MH, Laureys S, Pickard JD. Detecting awareness in the
vegetative state. Science 2006;313:1402.
10. Schiff ND. Cognitive motor dissociation following severe brain injuries. JAMA Neurology
2015;72:1413.
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids
487
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

11. Kondziella D, Friberg CK, Frokjaer VG, Fabricius M, Møller K. Preserved consciousness in
vegetative and minimal conscious states: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Neurol-
ogy, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 2016;87:485–92.
12. Hudetz A. Are we unconscious during general anesthesia? International Anestesiology Clinics
2008;46:25–42.
13. Laureys S, Pellas F, Van Eeckhout P, Ghorbel S, Schnakers C, Perrin F, et al. The locked-in
syndrome: What is it like to be conscious but paralyzed and voiceless? Progress in Brain Research
2005;150:495–511.
14. Sanders RD, Tononi G, Laureys S, Sleigh JW. Unresponsiveness ≠unconsciousness. Anesthesiology
2012;116:946–59.
15. Huang Z, Vlisides PE, Tarnal VC, Janke EL, Keefe KM, Collins MM, et al. Brain imaging reveals
covert consciousness during behavioral unresponsiveness induced by propofol. Scientific Reports
2018;8:13195.
16. Boly M, Coleman MR, Davis MH, Hampshire A, Bor D, Moonen G.. When thoughts become
action: An fMRI paradigm to study volitional brain activity in non-communicative brain injured
patients. Neuroimage 2007;36:972–92.
17. See note 8, Monti et al. 2010.
18. Owen AM. Improving diagnosis and prognosis in disorders of consciousness.
Brain
2020;143:1046–56.
19. See note 15, Huang et al. 2018.
20. Casali AG, Gosseries O, Rosanova M, Boly M, Sarasso S, Casali KR, et al. A theoretically based index
of consciousness independent of sensory processing and behavior. Science Translational Medicine
2013;5:198ra105.
21. Gosseries O, Di H, Laureys S, Boly M. Measuring consciousness in severely damaged brains. Annual
Review of Neuroscience 2014;37:457–78.
22. Sarasso S, Rosanova M, Casali AG, Casarotto S, Fecchio M, Boly M, et al. Quantifying cortical EEG
responses to TMS in (un)consciousness. Clinical EEG and Neuroscience 2014;45:40–9.
23. Storm JF, Boly M, Casali AG, Massimini M, Olcese U, Pennartz CMA, et al. Consciousness
regained: Disentangling mechanisms, brain systems, and behavioral responses. Journal of Neuro-
science 2017;37:10882–93.
24. Arlotta P, Paşca SP. Cell diversity in the human cerebral cortex: From the embryo to brain
organoids. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2020;56:194–8.
25. Lancaster MA, Renner M, Martin C-A, Wenzel D, Bicknell LS, Hurles ME, et al. Cerebral organoids
model human brain development and microcephaly. Nature 2013;501:373–9.
26. See note 1, Setiaa et al. 2019.
27. Benito-Kwiecinski S, Lancaster MA. Brain organoids: Human neurodevelopment in a dish. Cold
Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 2019;12:8.
28. Marx V. Reality check for organoids in neuroscience. Nature Methods 2020;17:961–4.
29. See note 1, Setiaa et al. 2019.
30. See note 2, Sun et al. 2021.
31. Farahany NA, Greely HT, Hyman S, Koch C, Grady C, Pașca SP, et al. The ethics of experimenting
with human brain tissue. Nature 2018;556:429–32.
32. Lavazza A. Human cerebral organoids and consciousness: A double‑edged sword. Monash Bio-
ethics Review 2020;38:105–28.
33. National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine. The Emerging Field of Human Neural
Organoids, Transplants, and Chimeras: Science, Ethics, and Governance. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press; 2021.
34. Ankenyv RA, Wolvetang E. Testing the correlates of consciousness in brain organoids: How do we
know and what do we do? American Journal of Bioethics 2020;21:51–3.
35. Bayne T, Seth A, Massimini M. Are there islands of awareness? Trends in Neuroscience
2020;43:6–16.
36. Lavazza A. Potential ethical problems with human cerebral organoids: Consciousness and moral
status of future brains in a dish. Brain Research 2021;1750:147146.
488
Matthew Owen et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

37. Lavazza A, Massimini M. Cerebral organoids: Ethical issues and consciousness assessment. Journal
of Medical Ethics 2018;44:606–10.
38. Lavazza A, Massimini M. Cerebral organoids and consciousness: How far are we willing to go?
Journal of Medical Ethics 2018;44:613–4.
39. Sawai T, Sakaguchi H, Thomas E, Takahashi J, Fujita M. The ethics of cerebral organoid research:
Being conscious of consciousness. Stem Cell Reports 2019;13:440–7.
40. Sawai T, Hayashi Y, Niikawa T, Shepherd J, Thomas E, Lee T-L, et al. Mapping the ethical issues of
brain organoid research and application. AJOB Neuroscience 2022;13:81–94.
41. Cf. Niikawa T, Hayashi Y, Shepherd J, Sawai T. Human cerebral organoids and consciousness.
Neuroethics 2022;15:1–16.
42. Cf. Shepherd J. Ethical (and epistemological) issues regarding consciousness in cerebral organoids.
Journal of Medical Ethics 2018;44:611–2.
43. Trujillo CA, Gao R, Negraes PD, Gu J, Buchanan J, Preissl S, et al. Complex oscillatory waves
emerging from cortical organoids model early human brain network development. Cell Stem Cell
2019;25:558–69.
44. Lavazza A. ‘Consciousnessoids’: Clues and insights from human cerebral organoids for the study of
consciousness. Neuroscience of Consciousness 2021;2:niab029.
45. Sakaguchi H, Ozaki Y, Ashida T, Matsubara T, Oishi N, Kihara S, et al. Self-organized synchronous
calcium transients in a cultured human neural network derived from cerebral organoids. Stem Cell
Report 2019;13:458–73.
46. Kagan BJ, Kitchen AC, Tran NT, Habibollahi F, Khajehnejad M, Parker BJ, et al. In vitro neurons
learn and exhibit sentience when embodied in a simulated game-world. Neuron 2022;110:1–18.15.
47. Lavazza A, Chinaia AA. Human cerebral organoids: The ethical stance of scientists. Stem Cell
Research & Therapy 2023;14:1–8.
48. See note 32, Lavazza 2020.
49. See note 36, Lavazza 2021.
50. See also Zilio F, Lavazza A. Consciousness in a rotor? Science and ethics of potentially conscious
human cerebral organoids. AJOB Neuroscience 2023;14(2):178–96.
51. Cf. Cecconi B, Laureys S, Annen J. Islands of awareness or cortical complexity? Trends in
Neuroscience 2020;43:545–6.
52. See also Owen M, Huang Z, Duclos C, Lavazza A, Grasso M, LaRock E, et al. Human cerebral
organoids and consciousness: Surveying relevant philosophy of mind. In: LaRock E, Guta MP, eds.
Experimental Evidence and the Conscious Person. forthcoming.
53. Koch C, Massimini M, Boly M, Tononi G. Neural correlates of consciousness: progress and
problems. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2016;17:307–21.
54. Owen M, Guta MP. Physically sufficient neural mechanisms of consciousness. Frontiers in Systems
Neuroscience 2019;13:1–14.
55. Chalmers DJ. The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. New York: Oxford
University Press; 1996, at 3-11.
56. Block N. On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
1995;18:227–87.
57. Seth A, Bayne T. Theories of consciousness. Natural Reviews Neuroscience 2022;23:439–452.
doi:10.1038/s41583-022-00587-4.
58. Sattin D, Magnani FG, Bartesaghi L, Caputo M, Fittipaldo AV, Cacciatore M, et al. Theoretical
models of consciousness: A scoping review. Brain Sciences 2021;11:1–58.
59. Huang Z, Zhang J, Wu J, Mashour GA, Hudetz AG. Temporal circuit of macroscale dynamic brain
activity supports human consciousness. Science Advances 2020;6:1–14.
60. Huang Z, Tarnal V, Vlisides PE, Janke EL, McKinney AM, Picton P, et al. Anterior insula regulates
brain network transitions that gate conscious access. Cell Reports 2021;35:109081.
61. Critchley HD, Wiens S, Rotshtein P, Öhman A, Dolan RJ. Neural systems supporting interoceptive
awareness. Nature Neuroscience 2004;7:189–95.
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids
489
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

62. Damasio A. Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain. New York, NY: Pantheon Books;
2010.
63. Faivre N, Salomon R, Blanke O. Visual consciousness and bodily self-consciousness. Current
Opinion in Neurology 2015;28:23–8.
64. Guta MP. The non-causal account of the spontanous emergence of phenomenal consciousness. In:
Guta MP, ed. Consciousness and the Ontology of Properties. London: Routledge; 2019:126–52.
65. Park H-D, Tallon-Baudry C. The neural subjective frame: From bodily signals to perceptual
consciousness. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 2014;
369:20130208.
66. Raichle ME. The brain’s default mode network. Annual Review of Neuroscience 2015;38:433–47.
67. Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, Powers WJ, Gusnard DA, Shulman GL. A default mode of
brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
2001;98:676–82.
68. Corbetta M, Shulman GL. Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain.
Natural Reviews Neuroscience 2002;3:201–15.
69. Fornito A, Harrison BJ, Zalesky A, Simons JS. Competitive and cooperative dynamics of large-scale
brain functional networks supporting recollection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
2012;109:12788–93.
70. Vossel S, Geng JJ, Fink GR. Dorsal and ventral attention systems: Distinct neural circuits but
collaborative roles. Neuroscientist 2014;20:150–9.
71. See note 59, Huang et al. 2020.
72. See note 60, Huang et al. 2021.
73. Fox MD, Corbetta M, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Raichle ME. Spontaneous neuronal activity
distinguishes human dorsal and ventral attention systems. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 2006;103:10046–51.
74. Menon V. Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: A unifying triple network model.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2011;15:483–506.
75. Seeley WW, Menon V, Schatzberg AF, Keller J, Glover GH, Kenna H, et al. Dissociable intrinsic
connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control. The Journal of Neuroscience
2007;27:2349–56.
76. See note 74, Menon 2011.
77. Michel M. A role for the anterior insular cortex in the global neuronal workspace model of
consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 2017;49:333–46.
78. Uddin LQ. Salience processing and insular cortical function and dysfunction. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 2015;16:55–61.
79. Allman JM, Tetreault NA, Hakeem AY, Manaye KF, Semendeferi K, Erwin JM, et al. The von
Economo neurons in the frontoinsular and anterior cingulate cortex. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 2011;1225:59–71.
80. Craig AD. How do you feel - now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 2009;10:59–70.
81. von Economo C. Die Encephalitis Lethargica. Vienna: Franz Deuticke; 1918.
82. Critchley H, Seth A. Will studies of macaque insula reveal the neural mechanisms of self-awareness?
Neuron 2012;74:423–6.
83. Evrard HC, Forro T, Logothetis NK. Von Economo neurons in the anterior insula of the macaque
monkey. Neuron 2012;74:482–9.
84. See note 60, Huang et al. 2021.
85. Tsuchiya N, Wilke M, Frässle S, Lamme VAF. No-report paradigms: Extracting the true neural
correlates of consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2015;19:757–70.
86. See note 52, Owen et al. forthcoming.
87. Baars BJ. A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1988.
88. Dehaene S. Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How the Brain Codes our Thoughts. London:
Penguin Books; 2014.
490
Matthew Owen et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

89. Dehaene S, Changeux J-P. Experimental and theoretical approaches to conscious processing.
Neuron 2011;70:200–27.
90. Mashour GA, Roelfsema P, Changeux J-P, Dehaene S. Conscious processing and the global
neuronal workspace hypothesis. Neuron 2020;105:776–98.
91. See note 90, Mashour et al. 2020, at 776.
92. See note 90, Mashour et al. 2020, at 777.
93. See note 90, Mashour et al. 2020, at 777.
94. Lamme VAF. How neuroscience will change our view on consciousness. Cognitive Neuroscience
2010;1:204–20.
95. See note 89, Dehaene, Changeux 2011, at 210.
96. Dehaene S, Lau H, Kouider S. What is consciousness, and could machines have it? Science
2017;358:486–92.
97. Dehaene S, Lau H, Kouider S. Conscious machines: Robot rights. Science 2018;359:400–2.
98. Tononi G. An information integration theory of consciousness. BMC Neuroscience 2004;5:1–22.
99. Tononi G. Consciousness as integrated information: A provisional manifesto. The Biological
Bulletin 2008;215:216–42.
100. Tononi G. Integrated information theory. Scholarpedia 2015;10.
101. Oizumi M, Albantakis L, Tononi G. From the phenomenology to the mechanisms of consciousness:
Integrated information theory 3.0. PLOS Computational Biology 2014;10:e1003588.
102. Tononi G, Boly M, Massimini M, Koch C. Integrated information theory: From consciousness to its
physical substrate. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2016;17;450–61.
103. Haun A, Tononi G. Why does space feel the way it does? Towards a principled account of spatial
experience. Entropy 2019;21:1160.
104. See note 102, Tononi et al. 2016, at 450.
105. Koch C. The Feeling of Life Itself: Why Consciousness Is Widespread but Cannot be Computed.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 2019: at 87–9, 104.
106. Massimini M, Tononi G. Sizing Up Consciousness: Towards an Objective Measure of the Capacity for
Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2018, at 72.
107. Tononi G, Koch C. Consciousness: Here, there and everywhere? Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 2015;370:20140167.
108. See note 106, Massimini, Tononi 2018, at 119–42.
109. See note 53, Koch et al. 2016, at 308, 315.
110. See note 101, Oizumi et al. 2014, at 19.
111. Tononi G. The integrated information theory of consciousness: An outline. In: Schneider S,
Velmans M, eds. The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley
Blackwell; 2017:243–56, at 254.
112. Goff P. Galileo’s Error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness. New York, NY: Pantheon
Books; 2019.
113. Merker B, Williford K, Rudrauf D. The integrated information theory of consciousness: A case of
mistaken identity. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 2021;45:e41.
114. Owen M. Exploring Common Ground Between the Integrated Information Theory and Aristote-
lian Metaphysics. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2019;26:163-87, at 178–83.
115. Dehaene S, Sergent C, Changeux JP. A neuronal network model linking subjective reports and
objective physiological data during conscious perception. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 2003;100:8520–5.
116. Van Vugt B, Dagnino B, Vartak D, Safaai H, Panzeri S, Dehaene S, et al. The threshold for conscious
report: Signal loss and response bias in visual and frontal cortex. Science 2018;360:537–42.
117. Doerig A, Schurger A, Herzog MH. Hard criteria for empirical theories of consciousness. Cognitive
Neuroscience 2021;12:41–62.
118. See note 103, Haun, Tononi 2019.
119. Ellia F, Hendren J, Grasso M, Kozma C, Mindt G, P Lang JP, et al. Consciousness and the fallacy of
misplaced objectivity. Neuroscience of Consciousness 2021;7:niab032.
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids
491
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

120. Grasso M, Haun AM, Tononi G. Of maps and grids. Neuroscience of Consciousness 2021;7:niab022.
121. See note 57, Seth, Bayne 2022.
122. See note 58, Sattin et al. 2021.
123. Reardon S. ‘Outlandish’ competition seeks the brain’s source of consciousness: $20 million project
puts competing ideas to the test. Science 2019. doi:10.1126/science.aaz8800.
124. Melloni L, Mudrik L, Pitts M, Bendtz K, Ferrante O, Gorska U, et al. An adversarial collaboration
protocol for testing contrasting predictions of global neuronal workspace and integrated informa-
tion theory. Plos One 2023;18:e0268577.
125. Cogitate Consortium, Ferrante O, Gorska-Klimowska U, Henin S, Hirschhorn R, Khalaf A, et al. An
adversarial collaboration to critically evaluate theories of consciousness. 2023; available at https://
www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.06.23.546249v2.
126. See note 105, Koch 2019, at chaps. 11–2.
127. Doerig A, Schurger A, Hess K, Herzog MH. The unfolding argument: Why IIT and other causal
structure theories cannot explain consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 2019;72:49–59.
128. Sánchez-Cañizare J. Integrated information theory as testing ground for causation: Why nested
hylomorphism overcomes physicalism and panpsychism. Journal of Consciousness Studies
2022;29:56–78.
129. Bayne T. On the axiomatic foundations of the integrated information theory of consciousness.
Neuroscience of Consciousness 2018;4:1–8.
130. Noe JP, Ishizawa Y, Patel SR, Eskandar EN, Wallace MT. Leveraging nonhuman primate multi-
sensory neurons and circuits in assessing consciousness Theory. The Journal of Neuroscience
2019;39:7485–500.
131. Qian X, Song H, Ming G. Brain organoids: Advances, applications and challenges. Development
2019;146:dev166074.
132. Cakir B, Xiang Y, Tanaka Y, Kural MH, Parent M, Kang Y-J, et al. Engineering of human brain
organoids with a functional vascular-like system. Nature Methods 2019;16:1169–75.
133. See note 2, Sun 2021, at 11.
134. Velasco V, Shariati SA, Esfandyarpour R. Microtechnology-based methods for organoid models.
Microsystems & Nanoengineering 2020;6:1–13.
135. Sharf T, van der Molen T, Glasauer SMK, Guzman E, Buccino AP, Luna G, et al. Functional
neuronal circuitry and oscillatory dynamics in human brain organoids. Nature Communications
2022;13:1–20.
136. Colombi I, Nieus T, Massimini M, Chiappalone M. Spontaneous and perturbational complexity in
cortical cultures. Brain Sciences 2021;11:1453.
137. Mansour AA, Gonçalves JT, Bloyd CW, Li H, Fernandes S, Quang D, et al. An in vivo model of
functional and vascularized human brain organoids. Nature Biotechnology 2018;36:432–41.
138. Chen IH, Wolf JA, Blue R, Song MM, Moreno JD, Ming G-L, et al. Transplantation of human brain
organoids: Revisiting the science and ethics of brain chimeras. Cell Stem Cell 2019;25:462–72.
139. Lavazza A, Reichlin M. Human brain organoids: Why there can be moral concerns if they grow up
in the lab and are transplanted or destroyed. Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics 2023;
32:582–596.
140. Shevlin H. Non-human consciousness and the specificity problem: A modest theoretical proposal.
Mind & Language 2021;36:297–314.
141. Carruthers P. Comparative psychology without consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition
2018;63:47–60.
142. Revah O, et al. Maturation and circuit integration of transplanted human cortical organoids. Nature
2022;610:319–26.
143. See note 131, Qian et al. 2019, at 2.
144. See note 131, Qian et al. 2019, at 3.
145. Gabriel E, Albanna W, Pasquini G, Ramani A, Josipovic N, Mariappan A, et al. Human brain
organoids assemble functionally integrated bilateral optic vesicles. Cell Stem Cell 2021;28:1740–57.
146. See note 37, Lavazza, Massimini 2018.
492
Matthew Owen et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press

147. Dehaene S, Changeux JP, Naccache L. The global neuronal workspace model of conscious access:
From neuronal architectures to clinical applications. In: Dehaene S, Christen Y, eds. Characterizing
Consciousness: From Cognition to the Clinic? London: Springer Nature; 2011:55–84.
148. See note 21, Gosseries et al. 2014.
149. Owen M. Measuring the Immeasurable Mind: Where Contemporary Neuroscience Meets the
Aristotelian Tradition. London: Lexington Books; 2021, at chap. 8.
Cite this article: Owen M, Huang Z, Duclos C, Lavazza A, Grasso M and Hudetz A. G (2024). Theoretical Neurobiology of
Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids. Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics 33: 473–493, doi:10.1017/
S0963180123000543
Theoretical Neurobiology of Consciousness Applied to Human Cerebral Organoids
493
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0963180123000543 Published online by Cambridge University Press
