April 2018  |  Volume 5  |  Article 32
1
Perspective
published: 03 April 2018
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2018.00032
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Antonio Chella, 
Università degli Studi di 
Palermo, Italy
Reviewed by: 
Adam Linson, 
University of Stirling, 
United Kingdom 
Christian Balkenius, 
Lund University, Sweden
*Correspondence:
Frank van der Velde 
f.vandervelde@utwente.nl
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Humanoid Robotics, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Robotics and AI
Received: 29 October 2017
Accepted: 14 March 2018
Published: 03 April 2018
Citation: 
van der Velde F (2018) In Situ 
Representations and Access 
Consciousness in Neural Blackboard 
or Workspace Architectures. 
Front. Robot. AI 5:32. 
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2018.00032
In Situ representations and Access 
consciousness in Neural Blackboard 
or Workspace Architectures
Frank van der Velde*
Cognitive Psychology and Ergonomics, Institute for Digital Society, University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands
Phenomenal theories of consciousness assert that consciousness is based on spe-
cific neural correlates in the brain, which can be separated from all cognitive functions 
we can perform. If so, the search for robot consciousness seems to be doomed. By 
contrast, theories of functional or access consciousness assert that consciousness 
can be studied only with forms of cognitive access, given by cognitive processes. 
Consequently, consciousness and cognitive access cannot be fully dissociated. Here, 
the global features of cognitive access of consciousness are discussed based on neural 
blackboard or (global) workspace architectures, combined with content addressable or 
“in situ” representations as found in the brain. These representations allow continuous 
cognitive access in the form of a process of covert or overt queries and answers that 
could underlie forms of access consciousness. A crucial aspect of this process is that 
it is controlled by the activity of the in situ representations themselves and the relations 
they can initiate, not by an external controller like a CPU that runs a particular program. 
Although the resulting process of access consciousness is indeed based on specific 
features of the brain, there are no principled reasons to assume that this process cannot 
be achieved in robots either.
Keywords: access consciousness, connection paths, global workspace, in situ representations, neural blackboard 
architectures, robots
1. INTRODUCTION
In one sense, discussing consciousness in a (humanoid) robot is easier than discussing human con-
sciousness. In the latter case, we are hampered by our own “first-person” perspective. We “know” 
what it means to be conscious because we experience it ourselves. However, this first-person perspec-
tive is a form of introspection, which is out of reach for scientific observation and discussion.
The influence of the first-person perspective is clear in the distinction between two different views 
on the nature of consciousness, known as phenomenal consciousness and functional (or access) con-
sciousness (Block, 1995; Cohen and Dennett, 2011; Taylor, 2012). Phenomenal consciousness asserts 
that conscious experiences result from specific neural correlates in the brain. Examples of these, 
depending on the theory at hand, are recurrent connections in the brain (e.g., Block, 2007), specific 
“microactivations” distributed over the brain (Zeki, 2003), or “winning” coalitions of neurons that 
result in a conscious experience of the representation they instantiate (Crick and Koch, 2003). The 
key notion of phenomenal consciousness is that the neural correlates responsible for consciousness 
can be separated (dissociated) from all the cognitive functions we can perform, such as attention, 
language, and the like. That is, consciousness “overflows access” (Cohen and Dennett, 2011).

2
van der Velde 
In Situ Representations and Access Consciousness
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
April 2018  |  Volume 5  |  Article 32
For robotics, this would mean that the search for robot con-
sciousness is doomed. Unless we endow robots with the required 
neural correlates (as in hybrid forms of neuro-robots), robots 
cannot possess forms of consciousness.
However, as convincingly argued by Cohen and Dennett 
(2011), phenomenal consciousness is a view on consciousness 
that is outside the reach of science precisely because it assumes 
neural correlates of consciousness separate from neural correlates 
of cognitive functions. A consequence of this view is that theories 
of consciousness cannot be empirically verified or falsified (which 
would always depend on some form of behavior produced by 
some kind of cognitive process).
By contrast, theories of functional or access consciousness 
assert that consciousness can be studied only with forms of cogni-
tive access, given by cognitive processes. Consequently, consci­
ousness and cognitive access cannot be fully dissociated. Instead, 
any form of consciousness would require a cognitive architecture 
that would allow forms of functional access.
An influential proposal for such an architecture is the Global 
Workspace theory, which asserts that consciousness arises when 
representations enter the Global Workspace of the brain and 
(temporarily) one of them dominates its activation (e.g., Baars, 
2002; Baars and Franklin, 2003; Wiggins, 2012). The perspective 
I address here is that this theory could indeed provide the basis 
for a cognitive and computational architecture for functional 
consciousness, provided it is combined with a key observation 
on the nature of representation in the brain. This observation 
concerns the notion that representations in the brain are “in situ,” 
which entails that they operate (at least in part) always as the same 
representation in each instantiation of the cognitive processes in 
which they participate.
In this way, in situ representations differ fundamentally from 
representations as used in von Neumann architectures, in which 
representations are inert, stored in arbitrary locations under 
the control of a CPU. By contrast, cognitive processes based on 
in  situ representations are controlled by these representations, 
and not by an outside controller like a CPU that runs a particular 
program. This could result in a continuous process of “queries 
and answers” (van der Velde, 2013), which could form the basis 
for forms of access consciousness.
In the following sections, I will describe the notions of in situ 
representations, functional consciousness, and their relation in 
more detail.
2. IN SITU REPRESENTATIONS
A striking feature of representations in human cognition, as 
argued here, is their content-addressable nature. In this way, a 
representation can be (re)activated by directly activating it or a 
part of it. This is different from a representation in computers, 
which is accessed by means of its address label (which is also 
true for files in Github, where address labels are derived from the 
content of the file). In this case, a list of address labels needs to be 
run through first to find the label.
The notion of content-addressable representation is at the 
basis of many theories of human semantic representation (but 
see below for a counter example) and was one of the main 
motivations for the rise of connectionism in the 1980s (Bechtel 
and Abrahamsen, 1991). For example, Hebb (1949) used 
content addressability as the basis for his notion of the “cell 
assembly” hypothesis of (concept) representations in the brain. 
According to this hypothesis, a cell (or neural) assembly of a 
concept develops over time by interconnecting those neurons 
in the brain that are involved in processing information and 
generating actions related to that concept. These assemblies 
could be distributed over (very) different parts of the cortex 
(and other brain structures), depending on their nature.
A more recent version of a similar model of content-
addressable representation in the brain is the “hub and spoke” 
theory of semantic representation in the brain (Lambon Ralph 
et al., 2017). In this theory, based on behavioral and imaging 
studies, modality-specific semantic information is represented 
in brain areas that process that kind of information (e.g., visual 
information in the visual cortex and auditory information in 
the auditory cortex). These kinds of representations are the 
“spokes” of semantic representations in the theory. However, 
the spokes are interconnected in (bi-lateral) hubs located in the 
anterior temporal lobes. Hub representations are transmodal, in 
that they respond to and correspond with cross-modal interac-
tions of modality-specific information. Examples of transmodal 
representations in the temporal cortex were also observed in 
single-cell studies with human subjects. For example, neurons 
were found that responded to (the identity of) a person, regard-
less of whether the face of the person (visual information) or 
name (visual or auditory information) was presented (Quian 
Quiroga, 2012).
A crucial point here is that transmodal hub representations 
interconnect the modal spoke representations. But they do not 
replace or stand in for them. That is, their content is determined 
by the spoke representations they are connected to, and that 
content is reactivated when the hub representation is activated. 
This is what the cell assembly idea of Hebb is about. It is also in 
agreement with the imaging (fMRI) observations of Huth et al. 
(2016), who, in an extensive study, measured brain activity related 
to words when people were listening to stories. So, auditory lan-
guage information was presented, but it activated a large set of 
cortical areas that responded to (also modal) semantic informa-
tion, both in the left hemisphere (63 semantically selective areas) 
and the right hemisphere (77 semantically selective areas) of the 
cortex.
Hence, even though representations can have parts in trans-
modal hubs, they consist of a (potentially) large set of neurons 
(an assembly) distributed over widely different areas in the cor-
tex, depending on their content. This shows why they are content 
addressable. By activating, say, the hub part of a representation, 
its spokes will be activated as well (as in the Huth et al. (2016)), 
revealing the content of the representation. But when (a part of) 
the spokes are activated by, for example, perceptual information, 
the hub part and consequently the other spokes can be activated 
as well. So, each activation of a representation potentially entails 
the activation of the entire hub and spokes. Crucially, this will 
be the same hub and set of spokes for each new activation of the 
representation (which, or course, can develop and change over 
time).

Figure 1 | In situ representation of red apple by a connection path between 
in situ concept representations in a neural blackboard architecture. The noun 
apple first binds to a Noun assembly (here, N1) in the Noun field of the neural 
blackboard and red binds to an Adjective assembly (here, A2) in the Adjective 
field. The connection path passes through gates, which provides control to 
represent relations. Here, activation of “gate” gives adjectives bound to 
nouns, here red to apple.
3
van der Velde 
In Situ Representations and Access Consciousness
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
April 2018  |  Volume 5  |  Article 32
This is why these representations can be referred to as “in situ” 
(van der Velde, 2016). They do not consist of some (neural) code 
that can be copied and transported elsewhere, but of the entire 
web-like hub and spoke structure (which would be impossible to 
copy and transfer to somewhere else in the brain, e.g., given its 
distributed nature).
3. COMPUTATIONAL ARCHITECTURES 
BASED ON IN SITU REPRESENTATIONS
The nature of in situ representations in the brain raises the ques-
tion of how they function in cognitive processes. In particular, in 
productive forms of cognitive processing, because these would 
seem to be the kind of cognitive processes that are needed to test 
forms of functional consciousness (Cohen and Dennett, 2011).
Productive processing entails that information is processed 
or produced in a combinatorial manner, based on (more elemen-
tary) constituent representations (concepts) and their relations. 
Productive processing is of key importance for human cogni-
tion, as found in language, reasoning, and visual perception. 
Consequently, they can be expected to play a key role in con-
sciousness as well, as in relating conscious experiences to each 
other (e.g., the apple is red versus the apple is green).
Combinatorial processing with representations that are not 
copied but remain in situ can be achieved in architectures that 
provide (temporal) connection paths between the constituent 
representations, in line with their relations. For example, consider 
the combination red apple, with in situ representations for red and 
apple. Each one consists of an assembly structure with spokes in 
parts of the cortex related to perception or actions, such as seeing 
or eating an apple, and links to the transmodal hub in the anterior 
temporal cortex.
In the neural blackboard architecture of van der Velde and de 
Kamps (2006), the relation red apple is produced by establishing 
a (temporal) connection path between the in situ concept repre-
sentations of red and apple, as illustrated in Figure 1. The path is 
achieved in a “neural blackboard,” which could be connected in 
particular to the hub part of the in situ representations.
In this neural blackboard, the concepts are temporarily 
bound to “structure assemblies” in line with their word type. 
So, apple is bound to a “Noun assembly” in a “Noun field” and 
red is bound to an “Adjective assembly” in an “Adjective field.” 
Such word type fields are in line with the existence of (agent 
and object) areas in the (temporal) cortex that are selectively 
activated when nouns function as agents (subjects) or objects of 
verbs (Frankland and Greene, 2015). In turn, the Noun assem-
bly bound to apple and the Adjective assembly bound to red can 
be temporarily bound to each other, representing the relation 
red apple. The structure of the neural blackboard is such that it 
allows the combination of arbitrary words in a familiar language 
(van der Velde and de Kamps, 2015).
Neural blackboards would not only exist to process or produce 
conceptual structures (e.g., relations between words in a sen-
tence) but also, for example, to process relations between visual 
features, as found in the structure of the visual cortex. Here, I 
am not discussing the specific way in which conceptual or visual 
relations can be processed in terms of in  situ representations 
(see van der Velde and de Kamps (2006) for detailed descriptions), 
but the consequence of this form of representation for cognition, 
and potentially for functional consciousness, as outlined in the 
next section.
4. FUNCTIONAL CONSCIOUSNESS
The relation between in situ representations and functional con-
sciousness, and they way they differ from phenomenal conscious-
ness, can be illustrated with a “perfect” experiment described by 
Cohen and Dennett (2011). Assume we have a subject in which 
the area in the brain responsible for color consciousness is iso-
lated from other brain areas higher up in the activation stream. 
So, this area (say V4 or inferotemporal cortex) would receive 
feedforward input from lower areas in the visual cortex, as in 
the normal situation, but cannot generate output to other areas. 
When a colored object is presented, say a red apple, the color area 
would be activated by and in correspondence with the color of the 
apple, as in the normal case. But activation of the color area itself 
is isolated from the rest of the brain.
Because of its isolation, the color area would not, for example, 
activate brain areas underlying language anymore. So, when 
presented with a red apple, our subject would not be able to 
say that the color is red. Indeed, she could not indicate by any 
form of action what the color of the apple is. Also, she would not 
become emotionally affected by the color (if that was the case 
before the isolation) because these areas are not activated by the 
color area anymore either. In fact, she would indicate that the 
apple is colorless. Yet, according to phenomenal consciousness 
theories, our subject would still be conscious of the color red, as 
its neural correlate is active. This activity could also be measured 
by brain imaging, supporting the notion that our subject is in fact 

4
van der Velde 
In Situ Representations and Access Consciousness
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
April 2018  |  Volume 5  |  Article 32
conscious of red, even though she indicates by any form of action 
or emotion that she is not.
Thus, although our subject would not (and could not) indicate 
that she has a first-person experience of red, theories of phenom-
enal consciousness would still assert she has. But this assertion is 
untestable, because no action of our subject can indicate that she 
is conscious of it. Consequently, the theory that supports such a 
form of consciousness is unverifiable. To make a theory of con-
sciousness verifiable, some form of action is needed to identify 
an experience as conscious. Hence, consciousness and cognitive 
functions are not fully dissociated. This is the notion underlying 
functional (or access) consciousness (Cohen and Dennett, 2011).
The “perfect” experiment of Cohen and Dennett (2011) relates 
directly to in situ representations because it entails that the in situ 
representation of, say, the concept red is broken. The in situ rep-
resentation of this concept not just consists of the connections 
that activate it but also of the connections that activate related 
concepts and circuits that produce behavior related to the concept 
(as saying the word red or pointing to a red object in a display).
So, the integrity of an in situ representation, in particular its 
ability to produce behavior, is crucial for its role in functional 
consciousness. This raises a reverse question. Suppose a subject 
would produce behavior like saying that she is conscious of the 
color red. Is that sufficient to conclude she is? At face value, this 
would be the result of a theory of access consciousness, because 
the cognitive function of identifying the color would entail the 
conscious experience of it. In that case, all that would be required 
for robots to be conscious, say of colors, is their ability to indicate 
the color of an object, by speech or another cognitive function.
However, just saying “red” does not indicate what a subject 
is (fully) conscious of. Words are labels to indicate an experi-
ence or concept but often do not cover their entire content. This 
observation does not entail a form of phenomenal consciousness. 
It just indicates that more elaborate forms of access (other words, 
or other forms of action) are needed to unravel the content of a 
conscious experience.
To see how this could proceed, we need to look at the way 
in which in situ representations function in a Global Workspace 
architecture.
5. CONSCIOUSNESS BASED ON QUERIES 
AND ANSWERS WITH IN SITU 
REPRESENTATIONS
In the Global Workspace theory of consciousness, representa-
tions compete to get access to the workspace and to (temporarily) 
dominate it (e.g., Baars, 2002; Baars and Franklin, 2003; Wiggins, 
2012). This raises the question of how representations can enter 
the workspace and how the domination of the workspace is 
related to consciousness. The notion that representations in the 
brain are in situ could provide the beginning of an answer to these 
questions. If so, the underlying architecture could also form a 
basis for robot consciousness.
An in situ representation would not “enter” the global workspace 
but instead would be connected to it, with a connection path as 
illustrated in Figure 1. If the workspace would have the structure 
of a neural blackboard as illustrated in this figure (or this neural 
blackboard would be a part of it), the “entrance” of a representation 
in the workspace would consist of a temporal activation of this 
connection path to and in the workspace. Several in situ represen-
tations could then compete, resulting in one representation (and 
its connection path) temporarily dominating the workspace.
The dominating in situ representation selected in the workspace 
could then form the basis for a functional form of consciousness 
by a (continuous) “process of explicit or implicit queries and 
answers” (van der Velde, 2013).
As an illustration, consider the entire representation of red 
apple in the neural blackboard architecture outlined in the 
previous section. Again, assume that a similar connection path 
would exist in the global workspace (or, alternatively, that the 
neural blackboard is a part of the workspace). Because of its 
in situ nature, the neural representation of the concept red would 
be connected to the visual areas in the brain that process and 
represent color, but also to the neural word representation red 
in language areas. The in situ representation of apple would be 
connected to the visual areas responsive to shape, and the word 
representation apple in the language areas.
The connection path between them in the neural blackboard 
(or global workspace) forms the basis for functional access and 
behavior, in which the relation between the in situ representa-
tions can be expressed in an action. So, for example, the (explicit 
or implicit) query “What is the color of the apple?” would be 
answered by activating the in  situ representation of apple  
(e.g., by seeing it or hearing the word apple in an actual ques-
tion) and the condition that allows the activation of Adjective 
assemblies bound to Noun assemblies (e.g., of apple) in the 
neural blackboard. In turn, this results in the activation of the 
in situ representation of red through the connection path that 
interconnects apple and red in the neural blackboard (or global 
workspace). This would form the basis for generating a response 
(reflecting functional access) such as pointing to the red object 
or reporting the word red.
The key notion of this process is that it is initiated and 
controlled by the in situ representations, and not by an outside 
controller like a CPU that runs a particular program. Hence, it 
will be a continuous process, in which activated in situ represen-
tations initiate queries to “ask” for other semantic information 
related to them (also represented by in situ representations). This 
continuous activation process underlies a continuous form of 
functional access, which in turn could be the basis for a process 
(stream) of access consciousness. More specific examples of this 
process and its relation to consciousness are presented in van der 
Velde (2013).
The importance of the fact that this process is controlled by 
in  situ representations is further illustrated in Figure  2. This 
figure illustrates an indirect way of representing content infor-
mation in the brain, as given by the indirection model of Kriete 
et al. (2013). Here, neural codes of red and apple are (temporarily) 
stored in “stripes” located in the prefrontal cortex (PFC). The 
stripes operate as registers in a computer memory. In turn, their 
address can be stored in other PFC “role stripes” (here for noun 
and adjective), which represents the relation red apple. So, the 
query apple color? can be answered by first retrieving the role 

Figure 2 | Indirection representation of red apple based on Kriete et al. 
(2013). Neural codes for concepts (e.g., apple, red) are stored in memory 
locations (“stripes”) in the prefrontal cortex. The addresses of these stripes 
(as given by the address operator &) are then stored in “role stripes,” needed 
to establish the relation between the concepts. An underlying connection 
structure provides and controls access to stripes.
5
van der Velde 
In Situ Representations and Access Consciousness
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
April 2018  |  Volume 5  |  Article 32
stripe (here, noun-stripe) that stores the stripe address of apple 
(&Stripe1) and then going to the adjective stripe related to that 
noun-stripe. Then, the address code of the adjective (&Stripe2) 
can be retrieved, which will result in finding the location (stripe) 
where the neural code for the color (red) is stored.
In this process, the representations themselves are inactive and 
not content addressable. They can be retrieved only by finding the 
addresses of the locations where they are stored. These addresses 
can be different on different occasions, depending on the preced-
ing representations stored in the process. As a result, the content 
of a given address (stripe) can vary from occasion to occasion. 
Hence, content and address are dissociated. So, activation of an 
address itself gives no information about its content and therefore 
cannot play a direct role in access consciousness.
Furthermore, a content code (e.g., of red) is generally not 
accessible when it is stored in a given stripe. For example, access 
to that given stripe needs to be blocked when other content is to 
be stored in other stripes. Otherwise, the content of the given 
stripe could inadvertently be deleted (overwritten) in the process 
of storing other representations in other stripes. Hence, the 
representation of red in Figure  2 resembles the isolated color 
representation in the perfect experiment of Cohen and Dennett 
(2011) discussed earlier. It may be active within the stripe, but its 
access to processes outside the stripe, and hence its active involve-
ment in these processes, is generally blocked. In other words, the 
content representations are generally inactive because the stripes 
in which they are stored are generally “closed.”
The indirection model of Kriete et al. (2013) is a model for 
productive computing in the brain, closely resembling productive 
computing in a Von Neumann architecture. So the in-activeness 
(and in-accessibility) of representations and their (negative) 
consequences for functional or access consciousness as discussed 
earlier would also hold for the Von Neumann architecture, which 
underlies digital computing. In turn, digital computing still forms 
the basis of many robot systems, such as the iCub robot (Natale 
et al., 2016).
So, the analysis of access consciousness as given here would 
have consequences for robot consciousness as well. In particular, 
it would seem that forms of robot consciousness would require a 
computing architecture based on in situ computing as illustrated 
above, instead of the Von Neumann kind of architectures still 
used to date. If correct, robot consciousness would indeed be 
based on specific features of the brain. But, in contrast to the 
assertion of phenomenal consciousness, it would not be based 
on specific physiological features of the brain, most likely unob-
tainable for robots, but on its specific computing and cognitive 
architecture.
6. CONCLUSION ABOUT ROBOT 
CONSCIOUSNESS
The analysis presented here provides a few suggestions about 
the possibility and requirements of robot consciousness. First, 
consciousness seems to be related to in situ representations that 
underlie the possibility of cognitive access. Second, conscious-
ness is more a process than a set of isolated conscious states. 
This, in combination with the requirement of access, suggests 
that consciousness is related to a continuous process of cognitive 
access. Third, this continuous process does not take the form of 
isolated instances of indirect activation of representations under 
the control of an external controller. Instead, the perspective is 
offered here that a continuous process of access can be achieved 
only when the process is directly controlled by (the activity of) 
in situ representations themselves, as in a continuous (covert or 
overt) process of queries and answers. Such a process seems to be 
in accordance with cognitive processing and access conscious-
ness as found in the human brain. There are no principled reasons 
to assume that this process cannot be achieved in robots either.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
FV conceived and wrote the article.
REFERENCES
Baars, B. J. (2002). The conscious access hypothesis: origins and recent evidence. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 6, 47–52. doi:10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01819-2 
Baars, B. J., and Franklin, S. (2003). How conscious experience and working 
memory interact. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 166–172. doi:10.1016/S1364-6613(03) 
00056-1 
Bechtel, W., and Abrahamsen, A. (1991). Connectionism and the Mind. Cambridge, 
MA: Blackwell.
Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about the function of consciousness. Behav. Brain 
Sci. 18, 227–287. doi:10.1017/S0140525X00038188 
Block, N. (2007). Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh between psy-
chology and neuroscience. Behav. Brain Sci. 30, 481–499. doi:10.1017/
S0140525X07002786 
Cohen, M. A., and Dennett, D. C. (2011). Consciousness cannot be separated from 
function. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 358–364. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2011.06.008 
Crick, F., and Koch, C. (2003). A framework for consciousness. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 
119–126. doi:10.1038/nn0203-119 
Frankland, S. M., and Greene, J. D. (2015). An architecture for encoding sentence 
meaning in left mid-superior temporal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 
11732–11737. doi:10.1073/pnas.1421236112 
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The Organisation of Behaviour. New York: Wiley.
Huth, A. G., de Heer, W. A., Griffiths, T. L., Theunissen, F. E., and Gallant, J. L. 
(2016). Natural speech reveals the semantic maps that tile human cerebral 
cortex. Nature 532, 453–458. doi:10.1038/nature17637 
Kriete, T., Noelle, D. C., Cohen, J. D., and O’Reilly, R. C. (2013). Indirection and 
symbol-like processing in the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 16390–16395. doi:10.1073/pnas.1303547110 

6
van der Velde 
In Situ Representations and Access Consciousness
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
April 2018  |  Volume 5  |  Article 32
Lambon Ralph, M. A., Jefferies, E., Patterson, K., and Rogers, T. T. (2017). The 
neural and computational bases of semantic cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 
42–55. doi:10.1038/nrn.2016.150 
Natale, L., Paikan, A., Randazzo, M., and Domenichelli, D. E. (2016). The icub 
software architecture: evolution and lessons learned. Front. Rob. AI 3:24. 
doi:10.3389/frobt.2016.00024 
Quian Quiroga, R. (2012). Concept cells: the building blocks of declarative 
memory functions. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 587–597. doi:10.1038/nrn3251 
Taylor, J. G. (2012). Can functional and phenomenal consciousness be divided?  
Int. J. Mach. Conscious. 4, 457–469. doi:10.1142/S1793843012400264 
van der Velde, F. (2013). Consciousness as a process of queries and answers in 
architectures based on in situ representations. Int. J. Mach. Conscious. 5, 27–45. 
doi:10.1142/S1793843013400039 
van der Velde, F. (2016). Concepts and relations in neurally inspired in situ concept- 
based computing. Front. Neurorobot. 10:4. doi:10.3389/fnbot.2016.00004 
van der Velde, F., and de Kamps, M. (2006). Neural blackboard architectures of 
combinatorial structures in cognition. Behav. Brain. Sci. 29, 37–70. doi:10.1017/
S0140525X06009022 
van der Velde, F., and de Kamps, M. (2015). The necessity of connection structures 
in neural models of variable binding. Cogn. Neurodyn. 9, 359–370. doi:10.1007/
s11571-015-9331-7 
Wiggins, G. A. (2012). The minds chorus: creativity before consciousness. Cognit. 
Comput. 4, 306–319. doi:10.1007/s12559-012-9151-6 
Zeki, S. (2003). The disunity of consciousness. Trends Cognit. Sci. 7, 214–218. 
doi:10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00081-0 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The author declares that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 van der Velde. This is an open-access article distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution 
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the 
copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, 
in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction 
is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
