Integrated World Modeling Theory (IWMT) and the Human Consciousness
Hypothesis (HCH)
Adam Safron1,3, Victoria Klimaj 2, Zahra Sheikhbahaee3
1Allen Discovery Center, Tufts University
2Indiana University
3Institute for Advanced Consciousness Studies
Adam.Safron@tufts.edu, Victoria.Klimaj@gmail.com, Sheikhbahaee@gmail.com
Abstract
Here, we explore points of convergence between the Hu-
man Consciousness Hypothesis (HCH) and Integrated World
Modeling Theory (IWMT). HCH posits that consciousness is
defined by three fundamental principles: Genesis (conscious
functions constituting an early-stage learning algorithm), Co-
herence (maximization of representational consistency), and
Second-Order Perception (synchronous meta-awareness of
perceptual processes). IWMT serves as a unifying model that
reconciles major theories of consciousness with a particu-
lar focus on Global Neuronal Workspace Theory, Integrated
Information Theory, and the Free Energy Principle and Ac-
tive Inference framework. Central to IWMT is the proposal
that phenomenal consciousness is “what it feels like” to be
the spatiotemporally and causally coherent functioning of a
probabilistic generative world model for an embodied agent.
Mechanistically, IWMT identifies ”self-organizing harmonic
modes” (SOHMs) as synchronous neural complexes imple-
menting iterative Bayesian inference to generate conscious-
ness as maximum a posteriori estimates of embodied senso-
rium states. Nested heterarchies of SOHMs are proposed as
biophysical substrates for consciousness, acting as dynamic
cores of integrated information that facilitate the synchronous
combination of multimodal sense data into a unified field of
experience to promote intelligent/adaptive (active) inference
and learning. Critically, IWMT requires (body-)world mod-
els to be capable of both informing and being informed by
action-perception cycles at behaviorally relevant timescales.
This architecture suggests consciousness could potentially
be realized in artificial systems with appropriate recurrent
dynamics and sufficient degrees (and kinds) of embodied
grounding.
Introduction
The California Institute for Machine Consciousness (CIMC)
is a new research initiative dedicated to understanding what
it might take to recapitulate the conscious functions of
biological intelligences in artificial systems. Towards this
end, the CIMC has introduced the Human Consciousness
Hypothesis (HCH), which defines conscious systems in
terms of three fundamental principles: 1) Genesis: Con-
sciousness emerges from self-organizing systems as an
early-stage learning algorithm and prerequisite for com-
plex intelligence; 2) Coherence: Consciousness functions as
Copyright © 2026, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
a coherence-maximizing process (or “cortical conductor”)
that minimizes constraint violations across mental repre-
sentations by orchestrating parallel processing and directing
attention to conflicts/inconsistencies; 3) Second-order per-
ception: Consciousness implements perception of percep-
tual processes, with this meta-awareness happening in syn-
chrony with the registration of perceptual content. Here, we
will summarize a recently introduced synthetic framework
for consciousness that is highly consonant with the HCH,
and which may provide useful direction in working towards
realizing CIMC’s goal of creating conscious machines: In-
tegrated World Modeling Theory (IWMT) (Safron 2020b,a,
2022, 2023).
Integrated World Modeling Theory (IWMT)
Integrating Across Theories of Consciousness
IWMT is a unifying model of phenomenal conscious-
ness and conscious access (Wiese 2020), explained across
computational/functional, algorithmic, and implementation-
al/mechanistic (supervenient) levels of analysis (Marr
1983). IWMT primarily focuses on Global Neuronal
Workspace Theory (GNWT) (Dehaene 2014), Integrated
Information Theory (IIT) (Tononi 2015), and the Free
Energy Principle and Active Inference framework (Fris-
ton 2010; Friston et al. 2017), but is also compati-
ble with other computational and biophysical models of
consciousness such as Recurrent Processing (Grossberg
2017), Predictive Processing (Hohwy and Seth 2020), Dy-
namic Core (Edelman, Gally, and Baars 2011), Temporo-
Spatial Sentience (Northoff et al. 2023), Higher Order
Thought (Brown, Lau, and LeDoux 2019), and Attention
Schema (Graziano 2013, 2019) theories. While not neces-
sarily endorsing all claims made by these various theories,
IWMT attempts to show how multiple (but not all) per-
spectives on consciousness may be coherently brought to-
gether for synergistic understanding. The overarching goal
of IWMT is to identify precise physical and computational
substrates of consciousness, so that they may be more skill-
fully understood and intervened upon, and potentially devel-
oped by artificial means.
AAAI Spring Symposium Series (SSS 2026)
345

Consciousness as the Coherent Modeling of Self
and World
IWMT suggests that consciousness can be functionally un-
derstood as a kind of coherently integrated (self-)world mod-
eling. World models are internal representations that a cog-
nizing system constructs of its environment (including itself)
that allow it to predict (or simulate) likely states based on
either sensed or imagined observations and actions. These
models expand intelligent and adaptive functioning by al-
lowing systems to infer dynamics of the world (and self)
beyond immediately-observable sense data, so enabling ca-
pacities for creative insight, planning, and causal reason-
ing based on counterfactual mental simulations (Pearl and
Mackenzie 2018). World models afford forms of cognitive
sophistication that Dennett (1996) described with respect to
“Popperian creatures” that can select which actions are most
likely to produce value (or avoid harm) based on imagined
consequences, and so can let their “hypotheses die in their
stead” (Klimaj and Safron 2025). From this point of view,
consciousness has a clear adaptive significance by enhanc-
ing intelligence via coherent modeling of system-world re-
lations.
World modeling is also increasingly suggested to be key
to solving the enduring problems of AI, such as in propos-
als for designing systems centered on spatial intelligence
(Li, 2025), or with Joint Embedding Predictive Architec-
tures (i.e., JEPA) (Assran et al. 2023, 2025). Some have sug-
gested that foundation models may also acquire such world
modeling capacities in their latent spaces when trained on
vast quantities of training data (Gwern 2020). However, it is
a matter of fierce debate whether such systems have repre-
sentations with sufficient degrees of coherent integration that
they can engage in world modeling (or “sentience”) of sim-
ilar kinds as underlying the remarkable abilities of animal
minds to efficiently learn and flexibly adapt to novel situa-
tions (Safron et al., in press). For reasons described in more
detail below, IWMT suggests that without sufficiently rich
physical or virtual embodiments, systems such as large lan-
guage models are not likely to be able to generate the kinds
of world modeling underlying robust general(izing) intelli-
gence, nor consciousness (Zahavy 2026).
According to IWMT, phenomenal consciousness is “what
it is like” (Nagel 1974) to be the spatiotemporally and
causally coherent functioning of a probabilistic generative
model for the sensorium of an embodied agent, entailing
either perception or imagination when respectively coupled
to or decoupled from sense-data. This synthetic framework
draws upon multiple theories to describe how subnetworks
of the brain can act as shared latent (work)spaces amongst
heterogeneous sensory modalities and arenas for Bayesian
model selection (Jaegle et al. 2021, 2022; Juliani, Kanai,
and Sasai 2022), generating system-world estimates with
sufficient rapidity to both inform and be informed by action-
perception cycles on the timescales of their formation, so
affording more flexibly intelligent and adaptive behavior.
IWMT is distinct from the models it attempts to integrate
in suggesting that no pre-existing theory taken in isola-
tion identifies sufficient conditions for explaining why there
should be “something that it feels like” to be a physical/com-
putational system.
Spatiotemporal and Causal Coherence and
Minimal Embodied Selfhood as Preconditions for
Consciousness
IWMT argues that phenomenal consciousness emerges from
processes capable of generating integrated models of sys-
tem and world with coherence with respect to space (as or-
ganized locality), time (as proportional changes in space),
and cause (as predictable/modellable regularities in these
changes). These coherence-making properties are inspired
by the preconditions for judgment suggested by Immanuel
Kant (1781) (i.e., “synthetic a priori categories”), with spa-
tiotemporal and causal coherence (and potentially integra-
tion into unified self-models [c.f. transcendental unity of ap-
perception]) also being necessary for there to be coherently
modeled compositional properties (Greff, van Steenkiste,
and Schmidhuber 2020), and so any kind of subjective expe-
rience whatsoever (De Kock 2016; Northoff 2012). [Please
note: while some degree of basic self-modeling and agency
may be required for coherent subjectivity, this selfhood may
potentially be extremely minimal (Metzinger 2020), and in-
deed cannot be overly complex if it is to serve the function
of a foundational inductive bias that emerges early in devel-
opment (i.e., the Genesis principle).]
IWMT is distinct from the theories it draws upon in that
it is fundamentally cybernetic and embodied in its approach.
That is, IWMT suggests that consciousness is “what it feels
like” to generate coherent system-world estimates with suf-
ficient rapidity that they can both inform and be informed by
action-perception cycles on the timescales over which they
evolve as embodied agents interact with their environments.
While inspired by IIT as a means of identifying biophys-
ical systems that are more or less likely to be capable of
entailing consciousness, IWMT suggests that systems could
generate (or be) arbitrarily large amounts of integrated infor-
mation and still not be conscious without embodied ground-
ing. While inspired by GNWT with respect to the computa-
tional principles underlying consciousness, IWMT suggests
that systems could instantiate functional global workspaces
without entailing any kind of subjective experience (un-
less workspace dynamics also entail spatiotemporally- and
causally-coherent world modeling with embodied ground-
ing). IWMT shares the enactive approach of Thompson and
Varela (2001) in insisting that consciousness is inseparable
from embodied cybernetic action–perception cycles, but it
diverges from strong enactivism in retaining brain-internal
representations and (probabilistic generative world) models
as essential explanatory constructs (Safron 2021a; Safron,
Hip´olito, and Clark 2023).
Learning to Model/Infer the World for the Sake of
Adaptive Action
What are the necessary and sufficient conditions for coher-
ently generating a stream of experience, organized accord-
ing to coherently structured perspectival reference frames?
In brief, IWMT views consciousness as a kind of mathemat-
346

ical object (Tegmark 2015), and in particular an iteratively
computed maximum a posteriori estimate—or compressed
representation (Safron 2023)—of likely system-world rela-
tions. More informally, phenomenal consciousness is under-
stood as a kind of computational object akin to a “deep
fake” created by generative AI, but rather than pixel ar-
rays, the information generated is iteratively inferred sen-
sorium states for embodied organisms with various combi-
nations of modal features (e.g., sight, touch, sound, intero-
ception). By focusing on the generation of likely patterns of
sense data that correspond to all the various aspects/quali-
ties of embodied experience—including the interoceptive in-
ferences contributing to emotional/affective feelings (Safron
2021a,b; Seth and Friston 2016)—IWMT may help answer
the (often begged) question as to why computational pro-
cesses would entail consciousness, rather than happening “in
the dark.”
Functionally speaking, phenomenal consciousness is pro-
posed to constitute a kind of evolutionary adaptation and
data structure that combines different sensory modalities
into an iteratively-estimated unified field of experience.
It would be highly adaptive—in terms of more intelli-
gent action selection and learning—for an agent to have a
spatiotemporally and causally coherent model of self and
world, organized by egocentric perspective, with organism-
salient/relevant features being given greater attention based
on histories of (valenced) experience. Functionally speak-
ing, conscious simulations of body-world relations could be
thought of as “digital twins,” or virtual representations/simu-
lations of physical systems that generate/predict likely states
for the sake of optimizing operations without requiring
costly and potentially risky interactions with the real world.
The generation of coherently organized streams of experi-
ence further promotes various forms of conscious access and
metacognitive reflection, so enhancing capacities for both
reasoning, episodic memory, and lifelong (meta-)learning
(c.f. Second-order perception and Genesis principles). This
developmental emphasis is also consistent with learning-
based accounts in which conscious access is progressively
acquired through plasticity and the increasing higher-order
knowledge of an agent’s own internal states (Cleeremans
2011).
Physical and Computational Substrates of
Consciousness and Conscious Access
IWMT identifies points of convergence between IIT and
GNWT and attempts to reconcile conflicting claims regard-
ing physical substrates of consciousness (Ferrante et al.
2025). Mechanistically, IWMT introduces “self-organizing
harmonic modes” (SOHMs) as synchronous complexes
of neural activity that emerge as metastable attractors
within brain networks—c.f. “communication through co-
herence” (Deco and Kringelbach 2016; Fries 2015)—func-
tioning as dynamic cores of integrated information and
workspaces. Streams of experience emerge as an evolv-
ing generation of sensorimotor predictions, with the pre-
cise composition of conscious contents depending on the
extent to which patterns of effective connectivity from var-
ious modalities couple with integrative-workspace-enabling
SOHMs on the timescales of their formation. These inte-
grating dynamics are suggested to be particularly likely to
occur via richly connected subnetworks that afford body-
centric sources of phenomenal binding and executive con-
trol. Along these connectivity backbones (for workspace dy-
namics), SOHMs are proposed to implement turbo coding
via loopy message-passing over predictive (autoencoding)
networks (McEliece, MacKay, and Cheng 1998), thus gen-
erating moments of consciousness as maximum a posteriori
estimates of likely system-world configurations (Figure 1).
These subjective experiences are also suggested to be
causally efficacious with respect to agency—c.f. ideo-
motor theory (Safron 2021a; Shin, Proctor, and Capaldi
2010)—functioning as sources of control energy and en-
slaving order parameters governing neural evolution (Haken
2007), with alpha frequencies generating multimodal bind-
ing into coherent sensorium-states by posterior cortices, and
cross-frequency phase-coupling within theta frequencies af-
fording involvement of frontal cortices—as well as the hip-
pocampal/entorhinal system—potentially affording various
forms of higher-order processing, conscious access, and vo-
litional control (Safron, C¸ atal, and Verbelen 2022; Safron
2021a; Gershman 2019). These dynamic cores of integrated
information also function as global workspaces, centered
on posterior cortices, but capable of being entrained by
frontal cortices and interoceptive hierarchies (Domenech
and Koechlin 2015; Seth, Suzuki, and Critchley 2012), thus
affording (varying degrees of) agentic causation. Therefore,
with respect to the inconclusive adversarial collaboration
between IIT and GNWT, both theories are proposed to be
correct in their claims about whether consciousness is real-
ized by either a “posterior hot zone” (as SOHMs over oc-
cipitotemporal and parietal cortices forming at alpha fre-
quencies) or by a broader functional network involving the
frontal lobes (as larger and more slowly evolving SOHMs
potentially requiring synchronization at theta frequencies).
In these ways, IIT and GNWT are suggested to make dif-
fering and potentially complementary claims about the sys-
temic properties required to generate different aspects of ex-
perience and awareness (i.e., phenomenal consciousness and
conscious access).
Implications for Machine Consciousness and
Future Directions for IWMT
In proposing correspondences between biophysical mecha-
nisms and machine learning algorithms/architectures (Fig-
ure 1), IWMT suggests consciousness could potentially be
realized in non-biological systems. Speculatively, if these
functional mappings were realized in the form of human-
mimetic, neuromorphic AI, then they may allow for both
flexible general intelligence and conscious experience. In-
deed, a fully developed theory of consciousness and its
algorithmic- and implementational-level realizations could
be considered to be ’pseudocode’ for (partially human-
interpretable) artificial general intelligence with “System 2”
capacities (Bengio 2019; Kahneman 2011), and possibly
also phenomenal consciousness.
In contrast to assertions that a computer simulation of wa-
ter cannot entail real “wetness” (Koch, 2019; Seth, 2026),
347

Computaonal Level
Phenomenological Level
Visuospaal 
Sketchpad, 
Workspace, 
Cartesian theater
Egocentric & 
Allocentric  
Reference Frames
Intenon  
Schema
Value 
Integraon
Generalized 
navigaon
MetaReinforcement 
Learning
Acon/Policy  
Selecon
Olfacon
Expected Free-
Energy Esmaon
Oculomotor 
Control
Amorzed 
Inference-Engine 
Forward Models
Low-Level 
Vision
Audion
Locaon  
&  
Affordance 
Compeon
Interocepve 
Inference 
& Value Esmaon
Trunk/Torso 
Acon---Percepon
Arm/Hand 
Acon---Percepon
Face/Mouth 
Acon---Percepon
Low-Level 
Vision
Propriocepve  
Control 
Hierarchy
Semanc 
Associaon
Body  
Image 
Schema
Coordinaon for 
Forward Models
Semanc/Self 
Control
Visual Feature 
Idenﬁcaon
Attenon- 
Schema
Value esmaon 
(via reward 
predicon error)
Visual  
Inference
Auditory 
inference
Propriocepve 
predicons
Somatosensory 
inference
= Theta complex
= Alpha complex
= Beta complex (slow)
= Beta complex (fast)
= Predicons
= Predicon Errors
Key
Implementaonal Level
Algorithmic Level
Figure 1: For a more detailed description, please see (Safron 2021b,a). Depiction of the human brain in terms of entailed
aspects of experience (i.e., phenomenology), as well as computational (or functional), algorithmic, and implementational levels
of analysis (Marr 1983). A phenomenological level is specified to provide mappings between consciousness and these comple-
mentary/supervenient levels of analysis. Modal depictions connote the radically embodied nature of mind, but not all images
are meant to indicate conscious experiences. On the algorithmic level, these functions are mapped onto variants of machine
learning architectures—e.g., autoencoders and generative adversarial networks, graph neural networks, recurrent reservoirs and
liquid state machines—organized according to potential realization by neural systems. While the modal character of prefrontal
computation is depicted at the phenomenological level of analysis, IWMT proposes frontal cortices might only indirectly con-
tribute to consciousness via influencing dynamics in posterior cortices. On the implementational level, biological realizations of
algorithmic processes are depicted as corresponding to flows of activity and interactions between neuronal populations, canal-
ized by the formation of metastable synchronous complexes (i.e., “self-organizing harmonic modes”).
348

processes involving virtual machines may be just as real/-
causal as physical mechanisms, and potentially even more
substantial (Albantakis 2017; Hoel et al. 2016; Hoel 2025).
That is, a simulation capturing the emergent properties of
interacting water molecules would recapitulate the phe-
nomenology of wetness within the simulated world, and
such properties could even be experienced externally if suf-
ficient information can be transmitted to subjects outside the
simulation (e.g. via fully immersive multimodal virtual real-
ity (Chalmers 2022)). Even if one grants that simulated wa-
ter cannot produce experienceable wetness, this is precisely
the same situation we face with respect to consciousness.
That is, an individual’s consciousness cannot directly make
someone else feel what that being is experiencing unless
there are sufficient efficient causal processes for transmit-
ting the necessary information to generate such experiences
(e.g. via detailed linguistic descriptions).
However, the realization of “artificial” consciousness may
depend upon particular implementational details, and may
practically (and perhaps also in principle) require the par-
allelism and physical recurrence of neuromorphic and/or
analogue computing systems. As described in greater de-
tail elsewhere (Safron 2022), while feedforward systems
can theoretically mimic the outputs of recurrent architec-
tures through “unrolling” (Albantakis 2017; Albantakis et al.
2017), non-recurrent networks (such as transformer-based
large language models) lack the functional closure, robust-
ness, and efficiency required for realizing the computational
properties that generate consciousness. According to IWMT,
recurrent processes can afford “dynamic cores” of effec-
tive connectivity that facilitate flexible binding and itera-
tive Bayesian model selection of likely system-world states,
given past experiences and present/hypothetical observa-
tions/actions. A feedforward system could theoretically in-
stantiate workspace functions (e.g. ”broadcasting”) (Doerig
et al. 2019), but this would be divorced from the environ-
mental couplings and historicity by which adaptive predic-
tive (world-)models are learned.
IWMT has been further developed to inform models of
intentional goal-oriented behavior (as enacted imaginings
(Safron 2021a)), high-level control for robotic systems (as
generalized navigation (Safron, C¸ atal, and Verbelen 2022)),
and to explain a diverse range of psychedelic phenomena
(as kinds of waking dreams (Safron et al. 2025)). Future di-
rections for advancing the theory include updating the al-
gorithmic mapping of biophysical processes to modern ma-
chine learning architectures—as imperfect-but-useful mod-
els of computational/functional properties—such as trans-
formers and recurrent state space models (Chen et al. 2024;
Zhu et al. 2025), as well as methods from physics-informed
machine learning (Champion et al. 2019; Hirsh et al. 2021),
and geometric deep learning (Bronstein, Bruna, and Cohen
2021; Greff, van Steenkiste, and Schmidhuber 2020; Yao
et al. 2025). If consciousness is potentially computable in
these ways, then advances in hardware and algorithms may
eventually allow us to test IWMT by examining whether
various conscious functions are realized when we construct
systems consistent with the theory. For example, future
neuromorphic systems could provide opportunities to test
whether binding via recurrent workspaces facilitates multi-
modal data fusion and enhances adaptive/intelligent control-
of and learning-from action-perception cycles for embodied
agents.
Conclusion: IWMT, HCH, and the Future of
Consciousness Studies
Thus, there appears to be substantial convergence between
IWMT and the HCH. IWMT supports the “Genesis” and
“Coherence” principles in that while conscious functions
may support high-level reasoning, consciousness is sug-
gested to emerge early in development from self-organizing
learning processes once modeling capacities achieve suffi-
cient degrees of (spatiotemporal and causal) coherence, and
also provides a means of enhancing the coherence of sub-
sequent inference and learning. IWMT also supports the
“Second-order perception” principle in that agent-centered
deep temporal models are realized via synchronous re-
current dynamics such that high-level beliefs contextual-
ize and stabilize low-level perceptual processes as they co-
evolve. These hierarchical priors take a variety of forms, in-
cluding body and attention schemas wherein covert/mental
actions—c.f. “Premotor” and “Biased Competition” theo-
ries (Desimone 1998; Rizzolatti and Craighero 2010; Safron
2021a)—allow for coherence-maximization via the top-
down (potentially agentic) control of attentional selection.
In working towards “IWMT 2.0,” it will undoubtedly be
fruitful to more deeply explore points of conceptual inter-
section with the HCH, as well as the broader idea(/value)
community growing around the California Institute for Ma-
chine Consciousness.
Acknowledgments
Adam Safron would like to thank the Survival and Flour-
ishing Fund in providing support for his position working
with Michael Levin (to whom he is also immensely grate-
ful) at the Allen Discovery Center. We would also like to
thank Zan Huang for helpful feedback on earlier versions of
this manuscript, as well as Karl Friston for the inspiration
and generous guidance he provided as these ideas were be-
ing developed.
References
Albantakis, L. 2017. A Tale of Two Animats: What does it
take to have goals. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10854.
Albantakis, L.; Marshall, W.; Hoel, E.; and Tononi, G. 2017.
What caused what? A quantitative account of actual cau-
sation using dynamical causal networks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.06716.
Assran, M.; Bardes, A.; Fan, D.; Garrido, Q.; Howes, R.;
Mojtaba, K.; Muckley, M.; Rizvi, A.; Roberts, C.; Sinha, K.;
Zholus, A.; Arnaud, S.; Gejji, A.; Martin, A.; Hogan, F. R.;
Dugas, D.; Bojanowski, P.; Khalidov, Y., V. LeCun; Rab-
bat, M.; and Ballas, N. 2025. V-JEPA 2: Self-Supervised
Video Models Enable Understanding, Prediction and Plan-
ning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09985.
349

Assran, M.; Duval, Q.; Misra, I.; Bojanowski, P.; Vincent,
P.; Rabbat, M.; LeCun, Y.; and Ballas, N. 2023.
Self-
Supervised Learning from Images with a Joint-Embedding
Predictive Architecture.
The IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Bengio, Y. 2019. The Consciousness Prior. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.08568.
Bronstein, M. M.; Bruna, J.; and Cohen, P., T. ad Veliˇckovi´c.
2021. Geometric Deep Learning: Grids, Groups, Graphs,
Geodesics, and Gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478.
Brown, R.; Lau, H.; and LeDoux, J. E. 2019. Understand-
ing the Higher-Order Approach to Consciousness. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 23(9): 754–768.
Chalmers, D. J. 2022.
Reality+: Virtual Worlds and the
Problems of Philosophy. Penguin Books Limited.
Champion, K.; Lusch, B.; Kutz, J. N.; and Brunton, S. L.
2019. Data-driven discovery of coordinates and governing
equations.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, 116(45): 22445–22451.
Chen, C.; Wu, Y.-F.; Yoon, J.; and Ahn, S. 2024. Trans-
Dreamer: Reinforcement Learning with Transformer World
Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09481.
Cleeremans, A. 2011. The radical plasticity thesis: how the
brain learns to be conscious. Frontiers in Psychology, 2: 86.
De Kock, L. 2016. Helmholtz’s Kant revisited (Once more).
The all-pervasive nature of Helmholtz’s struggle with Kant’s
Anschauung. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science,
56: 20–32.
Deco, G.; and Kringelbach, M. L. 2016. Metastability and
Coherence: Extending the Communication through Coher-
ence Hypothesis Using A Whole-Brain Computational Per-
spective. Trends in Neurosciences, 39(3): 125–135.
Dehaene, S. 2014. Consciousness and the Brain: Decipher-
ing How the Brain Codes Our Thoughts. Viking.
Dennett, D. 1996. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and
the Meanings of Life. Simon & Schuster.
Desimone, R. 1998.
Visual attention mediated by biased
competition in extrastriate visual cortex.
Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological
Sciences, 353(1373): 1245–1255.
Doerig, A.; Schurger, A.; Hess, K.; and Herzog, M. H. 2019.
The unfolding argument: Why IIT and other causal struc-
ture theories cannot explain consciousness. Consciousness
and Cognition, 72: 49–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.
2019.04.002.
Domenech, P.; and Koechlin, E. 2015. Executive control and
decision-making in the prefrontal cortex. Current Opinion
in Behavioral Sciences, 1: 101–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cobeha.2014.10.007.
Edelman, G.; Gally, J. A.; and Baars, B. J. 2011. Biology of
consciousness. Frontiers in Psychology, 2: 4.
Ferrante, O.; Gorska-Klimowska, U.; Henin, S.; Hirschhorn,
R.; Khalaf, A.; Lepauvre, A.; Liu, L.; Richter, D.; Vidal,
Y.; Bonacchi, N.; Brown, T.; Sripad, P.; Armendariz, M.;
Bendtz, K.; Ghafari, T.; Hetenyi, D.; Jeschke, J.; Kozma, C.;
Mazumder, D. R.; and Melloni, L. 2025. Adversarial test-
ing of global neuronal workspace and integrated information
theories of consciousness. Nature, 642(8066): 133–142.
Fries, P. 2015.
Rhythms For Cognition: Communication
Through Coherence. Neuron, 88(1): 220–235.
Friston, K. J. 2010.
The free-energy principle: A unified
brain theory?
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2): 127–
138.
Friston, K. J.; FitzGerald, T.; Rigoli, F.; Schwartenbeck, P.;
and Pezzulo, G. 2017. Active Inference: A Process Theory.
Neural Computation, 29(1): 1–49.
Gershman, S. J. 2019. The Generative Adversarial Brain.
Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 2.
Graziano, M. S. A. 2013.
Consciousness and the Social
Brain. Oxford University Press.
Graziano, M. S. A. 2019. Rethinking Consciousness: A Sci-
entific Theory of Subjective Experience. W. W. Norton &
Company, first edition.
Greff, K.; van Steenkiste, S.; and Schmidhuber, J. 2020. On
the Binding Problem in Artificial Neural Networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.05208.
Grossberg, S. 2017. Towards solving the hard problem of
consciousness: The varieties of brain resonances and the
conscious experiences that they support. Neural Networks,
87: 38–95.
Gwern. 2020. The Scaling Hypothesis. https://gwern.net/
scaling-hypothesis.
Haken, H. 2007. Synergetics. Scholarpedia, 2(1): 1400.
Hirsh, S. M.; Ichinaga, S. M.; Brunton, S. L.; Kutz, J. N.;
and Brunton, B. W. 2021. Structured Time-Delay Models
for Dynamical Systems with Connections to Frenet-Serret
Frame. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 477(2254): 20210097.
Hoel, E. 2025. Causal Emergence 2.0: Quantifying emer-
gent complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13395.
Hoel, E. P.; Albantakis, L.; Marshall, W.; and Tononi, G.
2016. Can the macro beat the micro? Integrated information
across spatiotemporal scales. Neuroscience of Conscious-
ness, 2016(1).
Hohwy, J.; and Seth, A. 2020.
Predictive processing as
a systematic basis for identifying the neural correlates of
consciousness. Preprint, PsyArXiv:https://osf.io/preprints/
psyarxiv/nd82g v1.
Jaegle, A.; Borgeaud, S.; Alayrac, J.-B.; Doersch, C.;
Ionescu, C.; Ding, D.; Koppula, S.; Zoran, D.; Brock, A.;
Shelhamer, E.; H´enaff, O.; Botvinick, M. M.; Zisserman, A.;
Vinyals, O.; and Carreira, J. 2022. Perceiver IO: A General
Architecture for Structured Inputs & Outputs. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.14795.
Jaegle, A.; Gimeno, F.; Brock, A.; Zisserman, A.; Vinyals,
O.; and Carreira, J. 2021. Perceiver: General Perception with
Iterative Attention. In Proceedings of the 38 th International
Conference on Machine Learning.
350

Juliani, A.; Kanai, R.; and Sasai, S. S. 2022. The Perceiver
Architecture is a Functional Global Workspace. In Proceed-
ings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
volume 44.
Kahneman, D. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Allen Lane.
Kant, I. 1781. Critique of Pure Reason. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Klimaj, V.; and Safron, A. 2025. The natural history of in-
telligent systems: Toward understanding major transitions in
cognitive evolution. OSF Preprint. https://doi.org/10.31234/
osf.io/vhz56 v2.
Marr, D. 1983. Vision: A Computational Investigation into
the Human Representation and Processing of Visual Infor-
mation. Henry Holt and Company.
McEliece, R. J.; MacKay, D. J. C.; and Cheng, J.-F. 1998.
Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s “belief propaga-
tion” algorithm. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Com-
munications, 16(2): 140–152.
Metzinger, T. 2020. Minimal phenomenal experience: Med-
itation, tonic alertness, and the phenomenology of “pure”
consciousness. Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(I): 1–
44.
Nagel, T. 1974. What Is It Like to Be a Bat? The Philosoph-
ical Review, 83(4): 435–450.
Northoff, G. 2012. Immanuel Kant’s mind and the brain’s
resting state. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(7): 356–359.
Northoff, G.; Klar, P.; Bein, M.; and Safron, A. 2023. As
without, so within: How the brain’s temporo-spatial align-
ment to the environment shapes consciousness. Interface
Focus, 13(3): 20220076.
Pearl, J.; and Mackenzie, D. 2018. The Book of Why: The
New Science of Cause and Effect. Basic Books.
Rizzolatti, G.; and Craighero, L. 2010. Premotor theory of
attention. Scholarpedia, 5(1): 6311.
Safron, A. 2020a.
Integrated World Modeling Theory
(IWMT) Implemented: Towards Reverse Engineering Con-
sciousness with the Free Energy Principle and Active In-
ference. In Verbelen, T.; Lanillos, P.; Buckley, C. L.; and
De Boom, C., eds., Active Inference, 135–155. Springer In-
ternational Publishing.
Safron, A. 2020b. An Integrated World Modeling Theory
(IWMT) of Consciousness: Combining Integrated Informa-
tion and Global Neuronal Workspace Theories With the Free
Energy Principle and Active Inference Framework; Toward
Solving the Hard Problem and Characterizing Agentic Cau-
sation. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 3.
Safron, A. 2021a. The Radically Embodied Conscious Cy-
bernetic Bayesian Brain: From Free Energy to Free Will and
Back Again. Entropy, 23(6).
Safron, A. 2021b. World Models and the Physical Substrates
of Consciousness: Hidden Sources of the Stream of Experi-
ence? Journal of Consciousness Studies, 28(11–12): 210–
221.
Safron, A. 2022.
Integrated world modeling theory ex-
panded: Implications for the future of consciousness. Fron-
tiers in Computational Neuroscience, 16.
Safron, A. 2023. AIXI, FEP-AI, and Integrated World Mod-
els: Towards a Unified Understanding of Intelligence and
Consciousness. In Buckley, C. L.; Cialfi, D.; Lanillos, P.;
Ramstead, M.; Sajid, N.; Shimazaki, H.; and Verbelen, T.,
eds., Active Inference, 251–273. Springer Nature Switzer-
land.
Safron, A.; C¸ atal, O.; and Verbelen, T. 2022. Generalized Si-
multaneous Localization and Mapping (G-SLAM) as unifi-
cation framework for natural and artificial intelligences: To-
wards reverse engineering the hippocampal/entorhinal sys-
tem and principles of high-level cognition. Frontiers in Sys-
tems Neuroscience, 16.
Safron, A.; Hip´olito, I.; and Clark, A. 2023. Editorial: Bio
A.I. - from embodied cognition to enactive robotics. Fron-
tiers in Neurorobotics, 17.
Safron, A.; Juliani, A.; Reggente, N.; Klimaj, V.; and John-
son, M. 2025. On the varieties of conscious experiences: Al-
tered Beliefs Under Psychedelics (ALBUS). Neuroscience
of Consciousness, 2025(1): niae038.
Seth, A. K.; and Friston, K. J. 2016. Active interoceptive in-
ference and the emotional brain. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B, 371(1708): 20160007.
Seth, A. K.; Suzuki, K.; and Critchley, H. D. 2012. An in-
teroceptive predictive coding model of conscious presence.
Frontiers in psychology, 2.
Shin, Y. K.; Proctor, R. W.; and Capaldi, E. J. 2010. A review
of contemporary ideomotor theory. Psychological Bulletin,
136(6): 943–974.
Tegmark, M. 2015.
Consciousness as a State of Matter.
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 76: 238–270.
Thompson, E.; and Varela, F. J. 2001. Radical embodiment:
neural dynamics and consciousness.
Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5(10).
Tononi, G. 2015. Integrated information theory. Scholarpe-
dia, 10(1): 4164.
Wiese, W. 2020. The science of consciousness does not need
another theory, it needs a minimal unifying model. Neuro-
science of Consciousness, 2020(1): niaa013.
Yao, S.; Ping, Y.; Yue, X.; and Chen, H. 2025. Graph Con-
volutional Networks for multi-modal robotic martial arts leg
pose recognition. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 18.
Zahavy, T. 2026. LLMs can’t jump. preprint philsci-archive.
https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/28024/.
Zhu, X.; Ruan, Q.; Qian, S.; and Zhang, M. 2025. A hy-
brid model based on transformer and Mamba for enhanced
sequence modeling. Scientific Reports, 15(1): 11428.
351
