OPINION
published: 10 November 2021
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.749868
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 749868
Edited by:
Narayanan Srinivasan,
Indian Institute of Technology
Kanpur, India
Reviewed by:
Ruﬁn VanRullen,
Centre National de la Recherche
Scientiﬁque (CNRS), France
*Correspondence:
Bernard J. Baars
baarsbj@gmail.com
Natalie Geld
ngeld@medneurocme.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Consciousness Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 30 July 2021
Accepted: 15 October 2021
Published: 10 November 2021
Citation:
Baars BJ, Geld N and Kozma R
(2021) Global Workspace Theory
(GWT) and Prefrontal Cortex: Recent
Developments.
Front. Psychol. 12:749868.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.749868
Global Workspace Theory (GWT) and
Prefrontal Cortex: Recent
Developments
Bernard J. Baars 1*, Natalie Geld 2* and Robert Kozma 3
1 Center for the Future Mind, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, United States, 2 MedNeuro, Inc., New York, NY,
United States, 3 Department of Mathematical Sciences, The University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, United States
Keywords: global workspace theory, prefrontal cortex (PFC), cortico-thalamic activity, conscious cognition,
intracranial electrical stimulation, visual processing, metacognition, Neural Darwinism
INTRODUCTION
In this work, we provide a brief overview of Global Workspace Theory (GWT), along with recent
developments and clariﬁcations of modern neuroscientiﬁc evidence. GWT started in the 1980s
as a purely psychological theory of conscious cognition, and has become a prominent approach
in scientiﬁc studies of consciousness (Mashour et al., 2020). Based on today’s far more detailed
understanding of the brain, GWT has adapted to new waves of evidence. The brain-based version
of GWT is called Global Workspace Dynamics (GWD) (Baars et al., 2013; Baars and Geld, 2019)
precisely because the cortex is viewed as a “uniﬁed oscillatory machine” (Steriade, 1999). GWT
therefore joins other theories in viewing consciousness as the product of highly integrated and
widespread cortico-thalamic (C-T) activity, following a long trail of evidence (Dehaene et al., 1998).
Here we aim to clarify some empirical questions that have been raised, and review evidence that
the prefrontal and posterior regions support dynamic global workspace functions, in agreement
with several other authors. Static, gross anatomical divisions are superseded by the dynamical
connectome of cortex.
We aim to correct the following misunderstandings. In a recent paper, Raccah et al. (2021)
claimed that the prefrontal cortex (PfC) is not causally involved in enabling consciousness, based
on a review of intracranial electrical stimulation (iES) experiments. We will show that Raccah et al.’s
claim that the prefrontal cortex (PfC) does not support consciousness is incorrect.
The brain evidence is now compelling that PfC indeed participates in the visual conscious
stream, for example, and excellent evidence for that has emerged in recent years. We discuss the
additional evidence and how that has a direct bearing on the PfC.
We also respond to Raccah et al.’s (2021) mistaken claim about the role of the prefrontal cortex
and GWT. GWT does not assert that the prefrontal cortex (PfC) is essential for conscious vision,
nor does it deny a role for the prefrontal lobe. The 1988 version of GWT made no assertions about
the role of cortex in consciousness. These claims are mistaken, and indeed, self contradictory.
In addition, this integrated conception of cortex also answers counterclaims about consciousness
and metacognition; therefore we address some misunderstandings about metacognition in the
Global Workspace “family” of theories (Shea and Frith, 2019).
Shea and Frith (2019) proposed that “The Global Workspace Needs Metacognition.” However,
in 1988 Baars already described two varieties of metacognition that are implied by GWT (Baars,
1988; Baars and Geld, 2019).
Here we have three objectives.
1. We provide a brief overview of Global Workspace Theory (GWT), and recent theoretical
developments in light of modern evidence.

Baars et al.
GWT and Prefrontal Cortex: Developments
2. We address some of the claims in these two papers, following
our previous brief response to the Raccah et al. publication
(see
also:
https://www.jneurosci.org/content/41/10/2076.
abstract#re-global-workspace-theory-gwt-and-prefrontal-
cortex-a-reply-to-raccah-et-al).
3. We clarify some points related to the conscious brain,
including
metacognition.
In
particular,
we
make
a
fundamental
distinction
between
CONSCIOUS
metacognition and UN-conscious metacognition.
Cortex is extraordinarily ﬂexible in its dynamic recruitment
of diﬀerent regions for diﬀerent tasks. Therefore, an arbitrary
division between prefrontal and other neuronal regions tends
to be misleading. Consciousness requires a much broader, more
integrative view (Bressler and Kelso, 2016).
GWT AND CORTEX
Global Workspace Theory (GWT): A Theory
of Human Cognitive Architecture, the
Cortex, and Consciousness. A Brief
Overview
Far from being some free-ﬂoating cloud around our heads,
sensory consciousness is profoundly embedded in biology,
anatomy, physiology, and above all, in adaptive brain functions
that serve us in every second of waking life. This is not some
philosophical speculation. It is now supported by numerous
empirical ﬁndings published in peer-reviewed journals that
are easily found in web archives. How can we understand
the evidence?
The best answer today is a “global workspace architecture,”
ﬁrst developed by cognitive modeling groups led by Alan Newell
and Herbert A. Simon. The term “global workspace” comes
from Artiﬁcial Intelligence, where it refers to a ﬂeeting memory
domain that allows for cooperative problem-solving by large
collections of specialized programs. Some brain implications of
the theory have been extensively explored over a 40 year period.
Global Workspace Theory (GWT) began with this question:
“How does a serial, integrated and very limited stream of
consciousness emerge from a nervous system that is mostly
unconscious, distributed, parallel and of enormous capacity?”
GWT is a widely used model for the role of conscious and
unconscious events in the functioning of the brain, a set of
explicit assumptions that can be tested, as many of them have
been over several decades.
Global Workspace Dynamics (GWD) is the most current
version
of
GWT—attempting
to
take
into
account
the
complexities of the living brain. Global Workspace Dynamics of
conscious experience is supported by brain evidence, particularly
the role of the cortex and thalamus. While the cortex and
thalamus look separate to the naked eye, they act as an integrated
system (Llinás and Paré, 1991; Edelman and Tononi, 2000;
Steriade, 2006; Freeman, 2007).
Stanislas Dehaene and Jean-Pierre Changeux in Paris have
developed experimentally testable models and made further
testable claims about the brain basis of visual consciousness
(Dehaene et al., 1998; Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). The
Dehaene-Changeux
Model
(DCM)
and
Global
Neuronal
Workspace Theory (GNWT) are part of the larger GW “family”
of related theories.
Stan Franklin and colleagues have built on GWT to sketch
out a more general theory of cognition in LIDA, a computational
implementation of GWT (Franklin et al., 2012).
These theoretical ideas provide a useful framework for our
rapidly accumulating body of evidence. They are consistent with
our current knowledge, and can be enriched to include other
aspects of human experience. GWT-GWD neither denies nor
asserts the dominance of any anatomical region; it is focused
on the dynamic functioning of the cerebral cortex, and does not
partition the cortex into static prefrontal and posterior divisions.
Brain anatomy gives a necessary (but not suﬃcient) account of
Global Workspace Dynamics.
The GWT “Family” of Theories Is
Evidence-Driven
The GW “family” of theories is essentially empirical. We believe
that the following theories are in harmony with each other,
including Dehaene et al. (1998), Edelman et al. (2011), Kozma
and Freeman (2016), Tononi et al. (2016), Deco et al. (2019), and
Mashour et al. (2020). Each approach is distinctive and each is
based on a strong body of evidence; but they converge well.
Because GWT-GWD aims to account for an extensive
body of evidence discussed by many authors, it is in accord
with Edelman’s Neural Darwinism, Freeman and Kozma’s
Neurodynamics, Tononi and Koch’s Information Integration
Theory, Dehaene and Changeux’s Global Neuronal Workspace
Theory, Mashour et al. and most recently, the functional
connectomics of Deco, Vidaurre and Kringelbach.
GWT and the Cortico-Thalamic System
A great deal of evidence supports the role of the cortico-
thalamic (C-T) system in conscious experiences. GWT provides
a reasonable interpretation of “ignitions” in the C-T system
(Dehaene and Changeux, 2011). A dynamic conception of cortex
suggests that PfC cannot be functionally separated from the rest
of the C-T system. We show evidence that the prefrontal and
posterior regions support dynamic global workspace functions,
in agreement with several other authors (Edelman et al., 2011;
Deco et al., 2019).
GW dynamics suggests that conscious experiences reﬂect
a ﬂexible “binding and broadcasting” function in the brain,
which is able to mobilize a large, distributed collection of
specialized cortical networks and processes that are not conscious
by themselves. Note that the “broadcast” phase proposed by
the theory should evoke widespread adaptation, for the same
reason that a ﬁre alarm should evoke widespread responding,
because the speciﬁc needs for task-relevant responders cannot be
completely known ahead of time. General alarms are interpreted
according to local conditions.
A brain-based GW interacts with an “audience” of highly
distributed, specialized knowledge sources, which interpret the
global signal in terms of local knowledge (Baars, 1988). The global
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 749868

Baars et al.
GWT and Prefrontal Cortex: Developments
FIGURE 1 | Shows three separate conscious events in a graphic interpretation
of alternative sources of “ignition” in the C-T core (Baars and Geld, 2019, p.
581). All three involve binding and broadcasting (“ignition”) in three cortical
locations. Area V1 is the ﬁrst visual projection area in the cortex, and has the
proper resolution and contrast representation to resolve the light from a single
star on a dark night. Parietal cortex serves to contextualize conscious objects
in egocentric and allocentric space, as in a coffee cup. The third “ignition” is
hypothesized to emerge in the prefrontal cortex, plausibly involving a Feeling of
Knowing (FOK), such as is induced by a tip-of-the-tongue task. (The
hippocampus is not considered here, but it plays a major role in conscious
perception and memory formation). Reprinted with permission.
signal triggers reentrant signaling; resonance is the typical activity
of the cortex.
GWT suggests that a bidirectional broadcast (ignition)
corresponds to conscious experience (Dehaene and Changeux,
2011). Figure 1 shows how ignitions in the cortex may emerge
from several diﬀerent regions of interest.
Figure 1 illustrates three diﬀerent and separate conscious
events. One of them is the sensory perception of a single star on a
dark night, which plausibly emerges in area V1. The second is the
visual experience of a coﬀee cup in nearby space, which plausibly
emerges in the parietal cortex in combination with lower and
higher regions of vision. The third conscious event may be a
subtle Feeling of Knowing (FOK), as in the tip-of-the-tongue
state, which is a semantic and linguistic event, in addition to
being closely involved with conscious perception.
Often,
multiple
gestalts
emerge
in
the
same
conscious experience.
There are ongoing debates about the role of prefrontal and
posterior regions of the cortex in conscious events, but this
dichotomy is not obvious, given the interactivity of the cerebral
cortex as a whole. It is far more likely that many diﬀerent cerebral
regions interact with each other from moment to moment, and
that a static “front vs. rear” contest is simply misleading.
Raccah et al. (2021) make an incorrect claim about Global
Workspace Theory (GWT). Raccah et al. themselves cite evidence
that supports the role of PfC in a wide range of conscious
experiences, including sensory experiences (sometimes called
“qualia”). These varieties of conscious experiences involve PfC
and other regions (Dehaene et al., 1998). Raccah et al. (2021),
in fact, provide a wealth of evidence for GWT-GWD; their
hypothesis is contradicted by the very evidence they present.
Cortex as a Uniﬁed Oscillatory Machine
Because almost all neural links in the cortico-thalamic (C-T)
system are bidirectional, reentrant signaling between receivers
and broadcasting sources may quickly establish task-speciﬁc
signaling activity. By analogy, a ﬁre department might locate the
source of a community-wide alarm and then communicate in
a much more task-speciﬁc way. Theoretical considerations are
important, but a wave of new evidence shows that PfC is directly
involved in sensory consciousness, including vision.
We now have direct neuronal studies that show that prefrontal
and other cortical regions constantly interact with each other.
For example, there is a direct causal link between FEF and
early visual processing. Other varieties of consciousness also
appear upon direct stimulation of PfC, as shown by iES
(Fox et al., 2020; Raccah et al., 2021).
Multiple studies in both humans and macaques show that
the prefrontal cortex may be necessary for visual consciousness.
Single units in the frontal eye ﬁelds (FEF), begin to ﬁre as soon
as ∼50–60 ms post-stimulus onset. Since visual consciousness
emerges after ∼300 ms, this ﬁnding suggests that the prefrontal
cortex activates ultra-rapidly, and suggests that multiple regions
of cortex must be involved in visual consciousness. FEF is a
region of the prefrontal cortex.
FEF is involved in the eye tremor of physiological nystagmus,
which maintains visual stimuli in consciousness. When the
constant rapid eye tremor is lost, visual objects are lost
from consciousness (see also Kirchner et al., 2009). Therefore,
state-of-the-art evidence supports a role for PfC in many
conscious functions.
As Libedinsky and Livingstone (2011) write:
“We found that fast responses in FEF strongly correlated with the
perceptual report of the animal. It is unlikely that short-latency
perceptually correlated activity is inherited from early visual areas,
since response latencies in FEF are shorter than those of visual
areas with perceptually correlated activity. These results suggest
that frontal brain areas are involved in generating the contents of
visual perception.”
These authors found FEF activity ∼60 ms or less post-stimulus,
while visually conscious stimuli are typically found more than
∼300 ms post-onset. Thus FEF, a prefrontal region, is involved
in pre-conscious visual input processing, contrary to the Raccah
et al. (2021) hypothesis.
Kirchner et al. (2009) report similar results, and write that:
“Although the frontal lobes in humans are generally viewed as
being involved in high-level cognitive processes, these results
indicate that the human FEF is a remarkably quickly activated
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 749868

Baars et al.
GWT and Prefrontal Cortex: Developments
multimodal region that belongs to a network of low-level
neocortical sensory areas.”
Broadly speaking, numerous regions involve both conscious and
unconscious processes.
Cortical Neuropercolation (CNP)
Mathematically, the dynamics of local-global eﬀects have been
described by Neuropercolation Theory (Perlovsky and Kozma,
2007; Kozma and Puljic, 2015). Neuropercolation describes
cortical phase transitions in the neuropil (layer one). These
phase transitions take place between a basal state consisting of
competing, local, fragmented components, and a state of high
coherence across the hemisphere globally, when the roles of space
and spatial diﬀerences cease (Kozma and Freeman, 2017). The
transition from fragmented states to global coherence appears to
be ignited in areas IT/MTL, in the case of visual consciousness
(Dehaene and Changeux, 2011).
We believe that it is not fruitful to pose the scientiﬁc issues
as a contest between PfC and the rest of the cortex. The highly
connected, recurrent activations of cortex at multiple levels
makes the Raccah et al. claim unlikely.
Conscious Events may Combine Multiple
Gestalt Layers in the Same Experience
Many conscious events are both sensory and semantic. For
example, a word in this sentence has sensory properties, but
it carries meaning in precisely the same event. Words that are
eﬀortful to read and understand also activate the prefrontal
and anterior cingulate cortex. Words that involve visual motor
actions like playing tennis, also recruit motor regions of
the cortex.
It
is
therefore
misleading
to
make
gross
anatomical
distinctions between prefrontal and other cortical regions.
Conscious Events Go Beyond the Senses
Some authors seem to restrict the term “consciousness” to
sensory events (Raccah et al., 2021). This is an overly narrow
deﬁnition that excludes numerous conscious experiences, such
as feelings of eﬀort, interoceptive emotional feelings, conscious
beliefs and ideas, endogenous visual imagery, and inner speech.1
1When we talk about thinking we often use the word “explicit” rather than
“conscious” and it is a plausible source of confusion in the literature. To make
our views abundantly clear, therefore, when we use the word conscious, we mean
to include both the terms “explicit cognition” as well as “conscious perception.”
Clarifying these terms relates directly to understanding and communicating
the evidence.
Some authors seem to restrict the term “consciousness” to sensory events
(Raccah et al., 2021). This is an overly narrow deﬁnition that excludes numerous
conscious experiences, such as feelings of eﬀort, interoceptive emotional feelings,
conscious beliefs and ideas, endogenous visual imagery, and inner speech.
This deﬁnitional heterogeneity is made worse by the widespread use in the
scientiﬁc literature (Frith and Frith, 2008) of terms like “explicit cognition”
instead of “conscious cognition.” In everyday English, the term “conscious”
extends beyond sensation and perception, and applies to ideas, voluntary decisions,
memory recall, etc., functions that have long been thought to involve the PfC. For
all intents and purposes, the term “explicit” means “conscious” or “consciously
mediated.” This is still a serious source of confusion today.
In science, the way we ask our questions is crucial, because our
questions are likely to bias our answers.
In short, the work by Raccah et al. is a worthy eﬀort
to make a systematic study of the role of various cortical
regions in consciousness. Obviously, the authors may not
claim that they provide a ﬁnal word in this ﬁeld. We feel
a bit more caution would be in order to avoid making
overly ambitious statements, which would inevitably prove
wrong or fade into obsolescence as research progresses. A
number of workers in the ﬁeld emphasize the deep and
rapid interactivity of numerous regions and connectivities in
the C-T core. That dynamical view of the C-T core should
give us pause about proposing dichotomies that may not be
in evidence.
In summary, GWT-GWD does not deny the role of local
regions, rather it integrates them by way of a unifying theory
(Baars et al., 2013; Baars and Geld, 2019).
Metacognition: Using the Prefrontal Cortex
to Think About Thinking
The GW concept, in itself, enables metacognitive processes from
unconscious onlooking systems viewing the conscious ﬂow in
the global workspace. GWT suggests the plausibility of both
conscious and unconscious metacognition. These should be
considered separately.
In particular, we make a fundamental distinction between:
a. CONSCIOUS metacognition, in which humans consciously
think about their own conscious experiences—editing a text
like this is one obvious example.
b. UN-conscious
metacognition,
where
UN-conscious
specialized
processors
monitor
the
conscious
global
workspace to interrupt the conscious ﬂow, or otherwise
intervene
if
the
UN-conscious
“critic”
detects
a
serious problem.
This is one basic advantage of the GW architectures ﬁrst
developed by Allen Newell and his team. Stan Franklin and many
other computer scientists and AI researchers have long exploited
this feature of GW architectures. In neural net mathematics
a similar strategy is used in so-called “critic neural networks”
(Si, 2005).
We believe that human conscious cognition inherently allows
for both conscious thought about the conscious stream, as well as
UN-conscious comments on the conscious stream.
For example, it would be easy to have an unconscious snake
detector as one of the many unconscious specialists watching the
brain equivalent of a global workspace. Such a snake detector
may exist in the two amygdalae near the tip of each temporal
lobe. If we were conscious of a complex image of a bush
There is no question that the prefrontal cortex is intimately associated with
explicit mental functions — that is to say, those conscious events that can be
explicated. Perceptual contents are not explicit in this sense, because people in
general cannot explicate the visual sense, for example: the terms “conscious”
and “explicit” are often confounded. They are closely related, but not identical
in meaning. Thus, a great many deﬁnitional problems result from a confusion
of labels.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 749868

Baars et al.
GWT and Prefrontal Cortex: Developments
in the hot African sun, the unconscious snake circuit would
identify the real snake and separate it from the shadow of
a branch. Snakes use camouﬂage, of course, and our brains
do have specialized snake circuits. Unconscious detection of
snake-branch ambiguities in the conscious stream would be
highly adaptive.
There is a great deal of evidence that all parts of the cortex
are involved with a variety of conscious experiences. The cortex
is deeply engaged with every kind of conscious experience
event: sensory consciousness (including so-called “qualia”);
endogenous sensory and non-sensory events such as visual
imagery, inner speech, conscious beliefs, conscious decisions,
consciously experienced emotions, and feelings of knowing
(FOKs). The traditional view of the prefrontal cortex is that it
includes self reﬂection and metacognition (Qiu et al., 2018).
Metacognition has also been claimed to be a distinctive
requirement for consciousness, but this claim has pros and
cons (Shea and Frith, 2019). Simply reporting one’s ﬂeeting
perceptual content involves one kind of metacognition, since
behavioral report is about the preceding sensory stimulus.
Conscious cues often trigger subsequent processing, such as
mental rehearsal for strengthening recall, and that task also
refers to the ﬁrst conscious exposure. Thus metacognition is
extremely common in the stream of consciousness (Yeung and
Summerﬁeld, 2012).
Franklin’s LIDA set of simulations of Global Workspace
Theory employs metacognition for numerous tasks, which is
relatively easy to program, since any “globally broadcast” event
can also trigger metacognitive agents (Franklin et al., 2012).
Yet
there
are
conscious
experiences
that
minimize
metacognition, namely absorbed experiences, as in the case
of “ﬂow” experiences and any other total involvement with a
dense ﬂow of events. After an absorbed state, it is generally
diﬃcult for people to remember metacognitive judgments
from the absorbed state (Csikszentmihalyi and Lebuda, 2017).
It seems as if “deep absorption” minimizes the capacity for
conscious metacognition, which makes sense in light of the
limited capacity constraint. Absorption may drive out conscious
metacognition. It is hard to reﬂect about inaccessible contents
that occurred during absorption. However, during absorption it
is entirely possible that unconscious metacognition continues,
which would be suggested by our ability during absorption
to be interrupted by an unexpected ﬁre alarm, presumably
detected unconsciously.
As for metacognitive experiences, they are so common in the
ordinary stream of consciousness that they must also involve the
broad cerebral cortex (Baars and Geld, 2019).
CONCLUSION: THE DYNAMICAL
CONNECTOME OF CORTEX
A wide range of experimental and theoretical studies in the ﬁeld
of consciousness emphasize the complex and rapid interactivity
of numerous regions and connectivities in the C–T core. That
dynamical view of the C–T core should give us pause about
proposing dichotomies that may not be in evidence.
From a theoretical viewpoint, Baars et al. (2013) suggest that
the cortico-thalamic system is inherently dynamic, a view also
taken by Pribram (1991), Edelman and Tononi (2000), Freeman
et al. (2008), Dehaene and Changeux (2011), Edelman et al.
(2011), and others. If we view the epicenter of conscious events
in cortex to be dynamic rather than anatomically static, the
question of prefrontal involvement becomes more nuanced. Most
recently, Deco et al. (2019) deﬁne a functional “rich club” of
active cerebral nodes and connectivities that may function as
a dynamic global workspace, one that is not rigidly tied to a
single anatomical region of cortex. There may be other ways
to identify global workspace dynamics, but this appears to be a
well-speciﬁed candidate.
Consciousness
studies
have
been
undergoing
rapid
development, in part, due to new experimental techniques
and brain monitoring. The GW “family” of theories has been
at the forefront of these developments, and continues to make
novel predictions. Relevant mathematical advances are also
emerging, including spatio-temporal dynamic network and
graph theory approaches. We hope that these points will help to
clarify the evidence about GWT and the conscious brain.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the Center for the Future Mind,
Florida Atlantic University (to BB).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is a tribute to Gerald M. Edelman, Walter J. Freeman,
and other colleagues for their various contributions to the work
presented here. The authors are grateful to Florida Atlantic
University’s Center for the Future Mind for their support in
funding open access publication fees for this listed article.
REFERENCES
Baars,
B.,
Franklin,
S.,
and
Ramsøy,
T.
(2013).
Global
workspace
dynamics:
cortical
“binding
and
propagation”
enables
conscious
contents.
Front.
Psychol.
4:200.
doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2013.
00200
Baars, B. J. (1988). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Baars, B. J., and Geld, N. (2019). On Consciousness: Science and Subjectivity—
Updated Works on Global Workspace Theory. New York, NY: The Nautilus
Press Publishing Group.
Bressler, S. L., and Kelso, J. A. S. (2016). Coordination dynamics in cognitive
neuroscience. Front. Neurosci. 10:397. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00397
Csikszentmihalyi, M., and Lebuda, I. (2017). A window into the bright side
of psychology: interview with Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. Euro. J. Psychol. 13,
810–821. doi: 10.5964/ejop.v13i4.1482
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 749868

Baars et al.
GWT and Prefrontal Cortex: Developments
Deco, G., Vidaurre, D., and Kringelbach, M. L. (2019). Revisiting the global
workspace: orchestration of the functional hierarchical organisation of the
human brain. BioRxiv 85:9579. doi: 10.1101/859579
Dehaene,
S.,
and
Changeux,
J.-P.
(2011).
Experimental
and
theoretical
approaches
to
conscious
processing.
Neuron
70,
200–227.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.03.018
Dehaene, S., Kerszberg, M., and Changeux, J.-P. (1998). A neuronal model of a
global workspace in eﬀortful cognitive tasks. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95:14529.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.24.14529
Edelman, G., Gally, J., and Baars, B. (2011). Biology of consciousness. Front.
Psychol. 2:4. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00004
Edelman, G., and Tononi, G. (2000). “Reentry and the Dynamic Core: Neural
Correlates of Conscious Experience,” in Neural Correlates of Consciousness—
Empirical and Conceptual Questions, e. T. Metzinger (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press), 139–151.
Fox, K. C. R., Shi, L., Baek, S., et al. (2020). Intrinsic network architecture predicts
the eﬀects elicited by intracranial electrical stimulation of the human brain. Nat.
Hum. Behav. 4, 1039–1052. doi: 10.1038/s41562-020-0910-1
Franklin, S., Strain, S., Snaider, J., McCall, R., and Faghihi, U. (2012). Global
workspace theory, its LIDA model and the underlying neuroscience. Biol.
Inspir. Cogn. Architect. 1, 32–43. doi: 10.1016/j.bica.2012.04.001
Freeman, W.J., Kozma, R., Bollob,á B., and Riordan, O. (2008). “Scale-free
cortical planar networks,” in Handbook of Large-Scale Random Networks, Bolyai
Society Mathematical Studies, eds B. Bollobás, R. Kozma, D. Miklós (Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer).
Freeman, W. J. (2007). Indirect biological measures of consciousness from ﬁeld
studies of brains as dynamical systems. Neural Netw. Oﬃc. J. Int. Neural Netw.
Soc. 20, 1021–1031. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2007.09.004
Frith, C. D., and Frith, U. (2008). Implicit and explicit processes in social cognition.
Neuron 60, 503–510. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.10.032
Kirchner, H., Barbeau, E. J., Thorpe, S. J., Régis, J., and Liégeois-Chauvel, C. (2009).
Ultra-rapid sensory responses in human frontal eye ﬁeld region. J. Neurosci. 29,
7599–7606. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1233-09.2009
Kozma, R., and Freeman, W. J. (2016). Cognitive Phase Transitions in the Cerebral
Cortex—Enhancing the Neuron Doctrine by Modeling Neural Fields. New York,
NY: Springer.
Kozma,
R.,
and
Freeman,
W.
J.
(2017).
Cinematic
operation
of
the
cerebral
cortex
interpreted
via
critical
transitions
in
self-organized
dynamic systems. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 11:10. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2017.
00010
Kozma, R., and Puljic, M. (2015). Random graph theory and neuropercolation for
modeling brain oscillations at criticality. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 31, 181–188.
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2014.11.005
Libedinsky, C., and Livingstone, M. (2011). Role of prefrontal cortex in conscious
visual perception. J. Neurosci. 31:64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3620-10.2011
Llinás, R. R., and Paré, D. (1991). Of dreaming and wakefulness. Neuroscience 44,
521–535. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(91)90075-Y
Mashour, G. A., Roelfsema, P., Changeux, J.-P., and Dehaene, S. (2020). Conscious
processing and the global neuronal workspace hypothesis. Neuron 105,
776–798. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.01.026
Perlovsky,
L.I.,
and
Kozma,
R.
(2007).
“Neurodynamics
of
cognition
and
consciousness,”
in
Neurodynamics
of
Cognition
and
Consciousness—Understanding Complex Systems, eds. L.I. Perlovsky and
R. Kozma. (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer), 1–8.
Pribram, K. H. (1991). Brain and perception: Holonomy and structure in ﬁgural
processing. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Qiu, L., Su, J., Ni, Y., Bai, Y., Zhang, X., Li, X., et al. (2018). The neural system of
metacognition accompanying decision-making in the prefrontal cortex. PLoS
Biol. 16:e2004037. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2004037
Raccah, O., Block, N., and Fox, K. C. R. (2021). Does the prefrontal cortex
play
an
essential
role
in
consciousness?
insights
from
intracranial
electrical
stimulation
of
the
human
brain.
J.
Neurosci.
41:2076.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1141-20.2020
Shea, N., and Frith, C. D. (2019). The global workspace needs metacognition.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 560–571. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2019.04.007
Si, J. (2005). “13—Direct Learning by Reinforcement∗∗Portions reprinted, with
permission, from the 2001 IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 2(2),
264–276,” in The Electrical Engineering Handbook, ed W.-K. Chen (Cambridge,
MA: Academic Press), 1151–1159.
Steriade,
M.
(1999).
Coherent
oscillations
and
short-term
plasticity
in
corticothalamic
networks.
Trends
Neurosci.
22,
337–345.
doi: 10.1016/S0166-2236(99)01407-1
Steriade, M. (2006). Grouping of brain rhythms in corticothalamic systems.
Neuroscience 137, 1087–1106. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005.10.029
Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., and Koch, C. (2016). Integrated information
theory: from consciousness to its physical substrate. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17,
450–461. doi: 10.1038/nrn.2016.44
Yeung, N., and Summerﬁeld, C. (2012). Metacognition in human decision-making:
conﬁdence and error monitoring. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., B., Biol. Sci. 367,
1310–1321. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2011.0416
Conﬂict of Interest: NG is founder of MedNeuro, Inc.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2021 Baars, Geld and Kozma. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
November 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 749868
